Recognize Any Regions
Haosen Yang1∗ ∗Chuofan Ma2Bin Wen3Yi Jiang3† †Zehuan Yuan3Xiatian Zhu1†
1University of Surrey2The University of Hong Kong3ByteDance
Abstract
Understanding the semantics of individual regions or patches of unconstrained
images, such as open-world object detection, remains a critical yet challenging
task in computer vision. Building on the success of powerful image-level vision-
language (ViL) foundation models like CLIP, recent efforts have sought to harness
their capabilities by either training a contrastive model from scratch with an exten-
sive collection of region-label pairs or aligning the outputs of a detection model
with image-level representations of region proposals. Despite notable progress,
these approaches are plagued by computationally intensive training requirements,
susceptibility to data noise, and deficiency in contextual information. To address
these limitations, we explore the synergistic potential of off-the-shelf foundation
models, leveraging their respective strengths in localization and semantics. We in-
troduce a novel, generic, and efficient architecture, named RegionSpot , designed
to integrate position-aware localization knowledge from a localization foundation
model (e.g., SAM) with semantic information from a ViL model (e.g., CLIP).
To fully exploit pretrained knowledge while minimizing training overhead, we
keep both foundation models frozen, focusing optimization efforts solely on a
lightweight attention-based knowledge integration module. Extensive experiments
in open-world object recognition show that our RegionSpot achieves significant
performance gain over prior alternatives, along with substantial computational
savings (e.g., training our model with 3 million data in a single day using 8 V100
GPUs). RegionSpot outperforms GLIP-L by 2.9 in mAP on LVIS val set, with an
even larger margin of 13.1 AP for more challenging and rare categories, and a 2.5
AP increase on ODinW. Furthermore, it exceeds GroundingDINO-L by 11.0 AP
for rare categories on the LVIS minival set.
1 Introduction
Remarkable progress has been achieved in the realm of purpose-generic image-level Vision-Language
(ViL) representation learning, as exemplified by foundation models like CLIP [ 24] and ALIGN [ 11].
These advancements have led to significant performance improvements across a diverse spectrum of
vision and multi-modal downstream tasks [ 7,44]. The efficacy of these approaches can be largely
attributed to their utilization of extensive datasets, typically encompassing millions, if not billions,
of training samples replete with rich information. In the pursuit of a more nuanced approach to
visual analysis, researchers have also ventured into the realm of universal region-level (e.g., objects)
comprehension. This is evident in recent research endeavors [ 7,39,23,4,43,16,19,22]. A common
approach to this involves learning the semantics of image regions by applying an image-level pre-
trained model (e.g., CLIP) to cropped regions, followed by representational distillation using the
output of a detection model [ 7,39], as depicted in Figure 1(a). However, utilizing individual cropped
∗This work was performed when Haosen Yang worked as an intern at ByteDance.
†Corresponding authors
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).PromptRegionSpot
VL Image
Encoder
Text
Encoder
Detector
 Detector
VL Text
Encoder
SAM
VL Image
Encoder
VL Text
Encoder
Resize
WindowCat
Pumpkin
Concept: Pumpkin, Cat, WindowA photo of a { concept }.
(a) (b) (c)CropObject  feature
Feature mapAlignmentFigure 1: Illustration of typical region-level visual understanding architecture . (a) Learning
the region recognition model by distilling image-level ViL representations from cropped regions
and incorporating them into a detection model ( e.g., [7]). (b) Fully fine-tuning both vision and
text models with a substantial dataset of region-label pairs. (c) Our proposed approach integrates
pretrained (frozen) localization and ViL models, emphasizing the learning of their representational
correlation.
regions in this design leads to the loss of crucial contextual information, which can hinder recognition
performance. [ 16] introduced an open-world detector with a fixed ViL model, bypassing knowledge
distillation. However, the use of ROIAlign [ 9] for region feature extraction poses limitations.
Furthermore, directly applying an image-level model to isolated local regions is less effective, as the
model was pretrained on entire images encompassing both object regions and surrounding context.
An alternative, albeit brute-force, approach revolves around constructing region-level representations
from scratch, harnessing an extensive dataset that pairs regions with labels [ 18,38,41,37] (Figure
1(b)). Nevertheless, this approach grapples with challenges such as the proliferation of noisy pseudo-
labels and significant training costs. Furthermore, significant advancements have materialized in
the realm of class-agnostic visual localization techniques, as illustrated by the notable work of
SAM [ 14]. This approach is characterized by its distinctive feature—an integration of position-aware
localization knowledge, which we consider a valuable complement to the inherent capabilities of
ViL models. Expanding upon this conceptual framework, our research introduces an innovative
architectural paradigm at the region level, herein referred to as RegionSpot . This framework
seamlessly incorporates large pre-trained ViL and localization models within an efficient training
regimen, obviating the necessity for an extensive repository of region-label pairings. Our methodology
centers on the acquisition of the correlation between localization data extracted from ‘local’ regions
by the localization model and the semantic representations encompassing the entirety of the image,
derived from the ViL model. This strategic approach permits us to circumvent the conventional
fine-tuning of both pre-trained models—wherein they remain ‘frozen’ during training—thereby
safeguarding the integrity of their rich knowledge and ensuring its maximal utilization, all while
mitigating the potential for performance degradation. To enact this cross-model correlation, we
employ the cross-attention mechanism [ 32]. In this configuration, the localization feature assumes
the role of the ‘query’, whereas the ViL feature assumes dual roles as both the ‘key’ and ‘value’. This
implementation effectively facilitates the fusion of semantic and localization information in a manner
that is amenable to learning and yields substantive efficacy.
Ourcontributions are as follows: (1) We introduce the concept of integrating off-the-shelf foundation
models to tackle region-level visual understanding. (2) To achieve this objective, we introduce a novel
architectural paradigm called RegionSpot , which does not necessitate training from scratch. This
approach excels in both optimization efficiency and data utilization. By circumventing the fine-tuning
of both localization and Vision-Language (ViL) components, our architecture retains its openness
and adaptability, welcoming the seamless integration of advancements in both domains. Extensive
experimentation in the context of open-world object understanding confirms the superior performance
of our method, even with a substantially smaller number of learnable parameters. Remarkably,
RegionSpot surpasses the state-of-the-art GLIP-L by 2.9 in mAP, with an even more substantial
advantage of 13.1 AP observed for the more intricate rare categories.
22 Related Work
Zero-shot in image recognition Zero-shot image recognition is the task of recognizing categories
that have not been seen during training. In [ 5] and [ 10], the authors utilized visual attributes
to facilitate knowledge transfer to unfamiliar categories. Researchers have also investigated the
utilization of class hierarchies, similarities, and object parts to enhance knowledge transfer, as
demonstrated in the works of [ 27,1,42,35]. Recent research has focused on aligning latent image-
text embeddings for classifying and describing visual content. [ 6] pioneered the establishment of
a visual semantic space through deep learning. Subsequently, CLIP [ 24] and ALIGN [ 11] attained
impressive results via contrastive learning with extensive collections of image-text pairs, showcasing
exceptional performance across diverse benchmarks. In contrast to previous endeavors that primarily
addressed image-level recognition, we focus on fine-grained recognition of visual elements at the
regional level.
Zero-shot in region understanding In zero-shot object recognition, the aim is to enable object
detectors to identify categories not encountered during training, such as [ 26,31,36]. Researchers
have explored various methods to bridge the gap between known and unknown categories using
pre-trained semantic or textual features [ 30,25,3], knowledge graphs [ 28,34], and more. Inspired
by the zero-shot capabilities of Vision-and-Language (ViL) like CLIP [ 24], several approaches have
sought to integrate pretrained Vision-and-Language (ViL) models. For example, [ 39,7,4] proposed
a method to distill learned image embeddings from CLIP for target detection by focusing on cropped
proposal regions. Another approach, RegionCLIP [ 43] employs a multistage training strategy. It starts
by generating pseudo-labels from captioning data and then proceeds with region-word contrastive
pretraining before transferring the knowledge to the detection task. [ 18] took a novel approach by
formulating object detection as a grounding problem and incorporating additional grounding data to
enhance semantic alignment at both phrase and region levels. Their results demonstrated improved
performance, even on fully-supervised detection benchmarks. [ 38] leveraged large-scale image
captioning datasets and expanded their knowledge database using generated pseudo-labels, bolstering
their detection capabilities. The use of generated pseudo-labels effectively extended the detectors’
generalization ability.
However, these methods face computational challenges and are susceptible to training data incon-
sistencies and image-level distractions. Differing from these studies, we explore the synergistic
benefits of foundation models SAM [ 14] and CLIP [ 24]. Leveraging their strengths in localization
and semantics, we propose an innovative region recognition framework.
3 Method
Our objective is to employ efficiently a pretrained ViL model and a localization model, trained
on extensive data, to achieve region-level representation and understanding. These representations
facilitate robust object conceptualization, especially for open-world region recognition. To realize
this, as shown in Figure 2(a) we formulate a new approach, named RegionSpot . In the following
sections, we will begin with a brief introduction to the foundational models in Section 3.1, followed
by a comprehensive explanation of our approach with focus on learning region-text alignment across
two pretrained models in Section 3.2.
3.1 Foundation Models
Vision-language foundation models use contrastive learning to map visual and textual data into a
shared embedding space through a contrastive loss. This technique, exemplified by CLIP with 400
million text-image pairs [ 24], and ALIGN with 1.8 billion pairs [ 11], aims to minimize the distances
between paired images and texts while maximizing distances between unpaired ones.
Localization foundation models have been advanced significantly. A prominent example is the
pioneering SAM model [ 14], which has been trained on the extensive SA-1B dataset, boasting
more than 1 billion automatically generated masks—an unprecedented scale, surpassing existing
segmentation datasets by a factor of 400. This dataset also comprises 11 million images.
SAM comprises three core modules: (a) Image encoder: Utilizing a ViT-based backbone, this module
extracts image features, yielding image embeddings. (b) Prompt encoder: It encodes positional
information from input points, boxes, or masks to facilitate the mask decoder. (c) Mask decoder:
3Image 
Encoder
CLIP
Text 
Encoder𝟏𝟎𝟐𝟒×𝟏𝟎𝟐𝟒
Prompt
EncoderTransposed 
Conv.
Region
Spot
plates, bowl, forks, 
knife, spoon, candle 
and glass.SAM
Alignment 
Lossglass
spoon
plate
candle⋮𝑻𝟏
𝑻𝟐
𝑻𝟑
𝑻𝑵
…𝑭𝟏𝑭𝟐𝑭𝟑 𝑭𝑴
𝑻𝟏𝑭𝟏𝑻𝟏𝑭𝟐𝑻𝟏𝑭𝟑𝑻𝟏𝑭𝑴
𝑻𝟐𝑭𝟏𝑻𝟐𝑭𝟐𝑻𝟐𝑭𝟑𝑻𝟐𝑭𝑴Prompt
𝑻𝟑𝑭𝟏𝑻𝟑𝑭𝟐𝑻𝟑𝑭𝟑𝑻𝟑𝑭𝑴
𝑻𝑵𝑭𝟏𝑻𝑵𝑭𝟐𝑻𝑵𝑭𝟑𝑻𝑵𝑭𝑴…
…
…
…⋮⋮⋮⋮⋱Transformer
Decoder⊗Mask Feat.
MaskCLIP Feat.…
… ProjectorPosition -aware token⊗Point -wise Product
Multi -Head 
Attention
Multi -Head
Self-AttentionCLIP Feat.
V K QV K Q
…
Position -aware token
(a) (b)Q
K, VFigure 2: Overview of our proposed RegionSpot . (a) We integrate position-aware tokens from a
localization model, such as SAM, with image-level feature maps extracted from a ViL model like
CLIP. This integration yields region-level semantic tokens, which are then subjected to region text
alignment. (b) Our cross-modal feature interaction design based on the attention mechanism.
This transformer-based decoder leverages both the extracted image embeddings and prompt tokens to
make final mask predictions. One of SAM’s remarkable features is its robust zero-shot generalization
to novel data, obviating the need for domain-specific fine-tuning. Thanks to extensive training on a
vast repository of prompt-text pairs, SAM demonstrates exceptional proficiency in object localization.
3.2 Region text alignment with frozen foundation models
In this section, we describe how we extract position-aware tokens from the localization foundation
model and generate image-level semantic features using the ViL foundation model. We achieve
inter-model association through a cross-attention mechanism that facilitates region text alignment.
Region-level position-aware tokens In our approach, we utilize manually-annotated object bound-
ing boxes, denoted as R={ri}, i= 1, .., N , as regions of interest in the images. For each of
these regions, represented as R, we extract position-aware tokens using the SAM model, denoted as
P={pi}, i= 1, .., N .
As depicted in Figure 2, SAM employs a mask decoder to generate a mask based on a provided
prompt. This process utilizes a transformer decoder, similar to the architecture in DETR [ 2], to
generate an object token. This object token plays a crucial role in predicting the prompt mask,
subsequently predicting dynamic MLP weights and performing a point-wise product with the mask
features. We refer to this resulting token as “position-aware” because it encodes essential information
about the object, including details about its texture and position. Following this, a projector is applied
to map the output dimension of the position-aware token to the image-level feature space as discussed
below.
Image-level semantic feature maps A single image can encompass multiple objects across nu-
merous categories, capturing integrated context. We can conceptually view an image’s feature map
as a composition of region embeddings with varying structures. To fully capitalize the ViL model,
we resize the input image to the required dimensions without cropping. Subsequently, we input this
resized image into the ViL model, yielding the image-level semantic feature map denoted as V.
Relating position-aware tokens and semantic feature maps Our model, referred to as
RegionSpot , efficiently establishes connections between region-level position-aware tokens and
image-level semantic feature maps using the cross-attention mechanism [ 32]. In this mechanism,
position-aware tokens Pserve as queries, while semantic feature maps Vtake on the roles of both
keys and values. This relationship is formulated as follows:
S=SoftmaxFpKT
v√
C
Vv, (1)
4where Fprepresents a transformation of P,KvandVvare derived from separate linear projections
ofV, and Cis the projected feature dimension. This approach, well-established in the literature,
has consistently demonstrated its effectiveness in information fusion. In our work, we extend its
application to enhance region-level understanding in open-world scenarios. Specifically, we leverage
this mechanism to integrate positional information with semantic content extracted from two distinct
models at the regional level, while also considering the broader context from the entire image, as
depicted in Figure 2(b).
Loss function In line with prior research, we generate text embeddings by processing category
texts along with prompt templates, like a photo of category in the scene , using the text encoder. Then,
we perform a dot product operation between each semantic token and its corresponding text features
to calculate matching scores. These scores can be supervised using the focal loss [20].
Zero short inference Following [ 43], we focus on the more challenging region recognition task
by utilizing human-annotated boxes or external region proposal generator. Inheriting the flexible
prompting capability from SAM, our model allows for region recognition through prompting.
4 Experiments
Training data In pursuit of a robust training environment, we combined diverse datasets with
varying label spaces. Our model’s flexible architecture allowed us to seamlessly replace one-hot
labels with class name strings. For training, we utilized publicly available detection datasets, com-
prising a total of approximately 3 million images. These datasets include Objects 365 (O365) [ 29],
OpenImages (OI) [ 15], and V3Det (V3D) [ 33], each contributing uniquely to the diverse repository.
•Objects 365 (O365) is a large-scale object detection dataset featuring 365 distinct object
categories across 0.66 million images. Our research employs an enriched version with over
10 million bounding boxes, averaging approximately 15.8 object annotations per image.
•OpenImages (OI) currently stands as the largest public object detection dataset, encompass-
ing about 14.6 million bounding box annotations, equivalent to around 8 annotations per
image.
•V3Det (V3D) distinguishes itself through a hierarchical organization, meticulously structur-
ing up to 13,029 categories within a category tree.
Benchmark settings In our rigorous evaluation process, we utilized the extensive LVIS detection
dataset [ 8], which encompasses 1203 categories and 19809 images reserved for validation. We do not
prioritize the performance on COCO [ 21] which includes only 80 common categories covered by the
Objects365 training dataset [ 29]. This limitation may not adequately assess a model’s generalization
in an open-world setting.
Since our current emphasis is not on object localization, we utilized ground-truth and class-agnostic
bounding boxes from an existing detector to predict categories based on corresponding text descrip-
tions, following the RegionCLIP approach [ 43]. Mean Average Precision (mAP) served as our
evaluation metric.
Implementation details We train RegionSpot using AdamW [ 13] optimizer with the initial
learning rate as 2.5 ×10−5. All models are trained with a mini-batch size 16 on 8 GPUs. The
default training schedule is 450K iterations, with the learning rate divided by 10 at 350K and 420K
iterations. The training process unfolds in two sequential stages: (1) a warm-up phase leveraging the
Objects365 to initiate the learning of region-word alignments, and (2) a phase of advanced learning
for region-word alignments, utilizing a rich compilation from three diverse object detection datasets.
The model is trained for 450K iterations at each stage. We implement several model variants: (1)
RegionSpot-Lite : Integrating the base versions of both SAM and CLIP. (2) RegionSpot-Pro :
Combining the SAM base with the more extensive CLIP large architecture. (3) RegionSpot-Pro ↑336:
Further extending RegionSpot-Pro by using input image resolution of 336.
5Table 1: Comparison of open-world zero-shot object recognition performance using ground-truth
(GT) boxes, SAM proposals generate by automatic mask generator, and GLIP boxes on the LVIS
dataset. * indicate finetune the CLIP with Adapter. The training time test on one V100 GPU
Method Training Data Proposals Times APrAPfAPall
CLIP-L w/ box - GT - 40.6 59.2 48.7
CLIP-L w/ mask - GT - 40.8 59.6 49.2
CLIP-L ↑336w/ mask - GT - 43.2 59.9 49.5
CLIP-L ↑336* w/ mask O365, OI, V3D GT 0.30k 46.8 63.2 53.1
RegionSpot-Lite O365, OI, V3D GT 0.18k 42.0 65.6 53.0
RegionSpot-Pro O365, OI, V3D GT 0.18k 50.6 68.8 56.6
RegionSpot-Pro ↑336 O365, OI, V3D GT 0.20k 55.4 68.6 59.9
CLIP-L ↑336* w/ mask O365, OI, V3D SAM 0.30k 11.3 16.4 14.5
RegionSpot-Pro O365, OI, V3D SAM 0.18k 13.1 17.3 16.1
RegionSpot-Pro ↑336 O365, OI, V3D SAM 0.20k 14.3 19.2 18.2
GLIP-T (B) O365 GLIP-T(B) 57.5k 4.2 13.6 11.3
RegionSpot-Lite O365 GLIP-T(B) 0.18k 12.7 15.7 14.1
GLIP-T O365,GoldG,Cap4M GLIP-T 92.1k 10.1 25.5 17.2
RegionSpot-Lite O365, OI, V3D GLIP-T 0.18k 20.0 24.2 21.1
GLIP-L FourODs,GoldG,Cap24M GLIP-L 120k 17.1 35.4 26.9
RegionSpot-Pro ↑336 O365, OI, V3D GLIP-L 0.2k 30.2 30.0 29.8
Table 2: Evaluation of zero-shot object detection on the LVIS minival dataset.
Method Training Data APr AP
GLIP-L FourODs,GoldG,Cap24M 28.2 37.3
GroundingDINO-L O365,OI,GoldG,Cap4M,COCO,RefC 22.2 33.9
RegionSpot-Pro ↑336 O365,OI,V3DET 33.2 36.9
4.1 Zero-shot Inference for Region Recognition
Zero-shot object detection on LVIS Val v1.0 Results on the LVIS benchmark are presented in
Table 1. With ground-truth bounding boxes as region proposals, our model substantially surpasses
the CLIP baselines (which applies CLIP on image crops) by a large margin ( e.g.,48.7, 49.2 vs.59.9).
For fair comparison, we finetune the CLIP withe adapter, our model substantially surpasses the CLIP
by a large margin. Moreover, in simulation of real-world cases, we move forward to test our method
with noisy region proposals generated from off-the-shelf proposal generator. We first employ SAM
as a proposal generator, inputting dense grid points to automatically generate proposals. It can be
seen that RegionSpot still consistently outperforms CLIP ( e.g.,14.5 vs.18.2 on AP all) in this case,
demonstrating the robustness of our method.
To fully exploit the potential of our method and synergy with the advancements of open world
object detection (OWD), we further utilize region proposals from state-of-the-art OWD models, i.e.,
GLIP, as our region prompts. Comparing with GLIP-T trained solely on the objects365 dataset,
we can observe a considerable performance gain achieved by RegionSpot ( e.g.,4.2vs.12.7 on AP r
and11.3 APvs.14.1 on AP all). After scaling up the training data and use 336 resolution image
as input, our models maintains superior performances over their GLIP counterparts. For instance,
RegionSpot-Pro ↑336surpasses GLIP-T by 17.6 APrwith less training data, showing compelling
scaling behavior with data scale and input resolution. For more extensive evaluation, we also utilize
bounding boxes generated by GLIP-L as prompts. It is noteworthy that RegionSpot achieves an
impressive 13.1 increase in AP rcompared to GLIP-L, even when trained on less data at higher
efficiency. Despite using a noisy box, we were still able to achieve promising results, thanks to the
robust localization ability of SAM. Additional experiments, including the ViLD protocol, can be
found in the Appendix
Open vocabulary object detection under ViLD-protocal To thoroughly evaluate our method, we
conducted experiments using the ViLD protocol [ 7], training on base categories and testing on novel
ones with the LVIS AP metric. For fair comparsion, all the method training only use the LVIS-base
dataset and use the RPN from RegionCLIP as proposal generator. We also adapted our training to
the LVIS-base dataset. As shown in Table 3, RegionSpot demonstrates competitive performance.
6It outperforms the similarly frozen-backbone F-VLM by 1.1 AP r. When we compared to Region-
CLIP, which benefits from additional caption pretraining, RegionSpot significantly outperforms the
pretrained version of RegionCLIP by 2.6 when utilizing same RPN.
Table 3: Comparison under the ViLD protocol [ 7]. All methods use the ResNet50 backbone. *
indicate pre-training with CC-3M
Method Proposals Trainable Backbone APrAPall
ViLD RPN ! 16.1 22.5
RegionCLIP* RPN ! 17.1 28.2
Detic-ViLD RPN ! 17.8 26.8
F-VLM RPN % 18.6 24.2
RegionSpot RPN % 19.7 25.0
Zero-shot object detection on LVIS minival5k [ 12]To fully exploit the potential of our method,
we report on MiniVal containing 5,000 images introduced in MDETR [ 12]. We use the output
proposals from GLIP as the prompt. As shown in Table 2, although we use 9x less training data,
our model maintains superior performances over GLIP-L by 5.0 on APr. Further, our method also
surpasses Grounding DINO-L (which even uses a more advanced detector) by 11.0 in APr.
Zero-shot instance segmentation We evaluate the performance of instance segmentation in a
zero-shot setting using the LVIS dataset [ 8]. By leveraging the output from GLIP as the prompt, we
direct it to RegionSpot for mask and class prediction. The mask AP is evaluated using the released
X-Decoder [ 45] and OpenSeeD [ 40], both of which are trained with mask-text pairs. Impressively, as
indicated in Table 4, RegionSpot outstrips X-Decoder and OpenSeeD by margins of 14.1 and 3.9 in
AP, respectively. These outcomes suggest that our proposed RegionSpot can effectively harness the
foundational model’s capabilities to achieve more accurate region understanding.
Zero-shot object detection on ODinW [ 17]This benchmark was designed to evaluate model
performance in real-world scenarios. To accurately evaluate recognition capabilities, we filter the
dataset to include only those with more than three categories. The AP for each dataset is reported in
Table 5. Impressively, RegionSpot-Pro ↑336, utilizing GLIP-L proposals, surpasses GLIP-L by a
margin of 2.5 AP, attributable to its precise region recognition. Furthermore, our method exceeds the
performance of GroundingDINO, even though it employs a more advanced detector.
4.2 Ablation Study
We conducted an ablation study for RegionSpot -BLusing the boxes generated by GLIP. Unless
otherwise mentioned, training was performed on three different detection datasets.
Enhancement with CLIP vision embedding We conjugate that a key ingredient with RegionSpot
is the use of semantic information from CLIP vision encoder. To validate this assertion, we began
our evaluation without the CLIP feature and subsequently integrated the class token output from the
CLIP vision encoder. Results in Table 6a demonstrate that: (1) The CLIP feature offers a significant
boost, pushing the baseline without CLIP vision encoder to 22.1, which suggests inherent semantic
limitations in SAM. (2) More notably, the inclusion of CLIP enhances overall performance to 23.7.
This underscores the potential of the class token to encapsulate global information from the entire
image.
Position-aware tokens selection in SAM The position-aware tokens are generated by intermediary
module in the SAM. We examined various locations for this generation, specifically after the Prompt
encoder, the Transformer decoder, and the MLP within the SAM. Results presented in Table 7b
indicate that generating output tokens after the Transformer decoder yields the best performance.
Table 4: Evaluation of zero-shot instance segmentation on the LVIS minival dataset.
Method APrAPcAPf AP
X-Decoder - - - 9.4
OpenSeed - - - 19.6
RegionSpot-Pro ↑336 21.5 25.0 23.2 23.5
7Table 5: Evaluation of zero-shot object detection on the ODinW dataset.
Method Aerial. Drone. Aquarium PascalVOC shellfish vehicles Avg.
GroundingDINO-T 10.3 17.5 55.7 29.5 58.5 34.3
GLIP-T 12.5 18.4 56.2 26.3 56.0 33.8
GLIP-L 7.1 26.9 61.7 68.9 57.3 44.4
RegionSpot-Lite 13.1 20.1 58.2 30.1 57.2 35.7
RegionSpot-Pro ↑336 14.2 27.2 62.7 69.3 61.3 46.9
Table 6: Ablation experiments on LVIS. (a) The effective of CLIP vision encoder; (b)Position-
aware tokens selection ; (c)Depth of RegionSpot .
(a)
CLIP AP
w/o CLIP vision. 8.0
+ CLIP feat. map 22.1
+ Class token 23.7(b)
Position-aware tokens AP
Prompt encoder 18.6
Transformer 23.7
MLP 20.4(c)
Depth AP
1 23.2
3 23.7
6 22.8
This observation is expected since tokens derived from the Prompt encoder are relatively undeveloped.
Surprisingly, it can outperform GLIP ( i.e.,18.6 vs.17.2). Moreover, there is a performance decline
after the MLP, which can be attributed to dimensional reduction.
Module architecture Another pivotal aspect of RegionSpot is the depth of model. To assess its
impact, we experimented by varying the depth of our model. As indicated in Table 6c, it is imperative
for the model to have a sufficiently large depth, such as 3 blocks, without being excessive.
Prompt engineering Finally, we carried out an ablation study focusing on prompt engineering,
incorporating both box prompts in SAM and text prompts in the text encoder. As evidenced by the
results in Table 7a: (1) Leveraging multiple boxes as prompts in SAM boosts performance, achieving
an AP of 22.1. This enhancement is credited to the self-attention mechanism of RegionSpot , which
adeptly fuses information from varied regions. (2) Further utilizing text prompts results in a modest
performance boost, specifically an increase of 1.6 AP.
Ablation study of SAM model We conjugate that a key ingredient is the position-aware information
from SAM. We evaluating the impact of different SAM model sizes, such as ViT-L, is essential.
We conducted experiments with varying SAM model sizes. As shown in the Table 7b, our findings
are summarized as follows: (1) Impact of SAM Model Size: Our results indicate that the use of
larger SAM models (e.g., SAM-L) improves mask AP due to the higher quality of mask generation.
However, for box AP, the improvement is not significant. This is because the SAM mask token
primarily contributes position-aware knowledge, which is already sufficiently captured by ViT-B and
ViT-L. (2) Choice of SAM Model: Given our focus on region recognition, we opted for SAM-B,
balancing performance and computational efficiency.
4.3 Visualization
Result visualization In Figure 3, we present the results of bounding region recognition on the
LVIS [ 8] dataset, comparing between GLIP and RegionSpot . To assess the zero-shot recognition
capability, we employ the same bounding boxes for both models. As observed, RegionSpot can
distinguish even subtle differences, recognizing smaller objects like “lemon” and “tennis ball” and
similar objects like “lantern” and “fireplug”. Notably, RegionSpot stands out in terms of the accuracy
of its label predictions, especially within the category of rare classes.
Table 7: Ablation experiments on LVIS. (a) The effective of propmpt engineering; (b)The effective
of SAM
(a)
Prompt APrAPf AP
baseline 19.6 21.2 18.5
w/ mutiple boxes prompt 23.2 25.0 22.1
w/ text prompt 24.9 25.5 23.7(b)
SAM box AP rmask AP r
ViT-B 24.9 22.8
ViT-L 24.7 23.6
8GLIP
OURSFigure 3: Qualitative prediction results of GLIP-T [ 18] (first row) and RegionSpot (second row)
on the LVIS dataset [ 8]. Our model recognizes the objects more accurately. Best viewed when
zooming-in.
Figure 4: Cross-attention maps in RegionSpot . These maps show that the position-aware token
aligns effectively with the semantic feature map of the entire image. In each row, the blue and red
boxes are corresponding to the left and right maps respectively.
Model behavior visualization To gain more intuitive understanding on the effect brought by our
RegionSpot , we examine the cross attention map on LVIS [ 8]. We take the output tokens as ‘query’
and CLIP feature map as ‘key’ and ‘value’. For clearer visualization, we omit the class token from
the CLIP semantic feature. The resulting attention map clearly depicts the correspondence between
the position-aware tokens generated by SAM and the feature map produced by CLIP. Using this
arrangement, we gain a visual insight into how RegionSpot establishes connections between distinct
features. As depicted in Figure 4, the attention maps vividly showcase RegionSpot capability to
seamlessly incorporate both SAM and CLIP. Such visualizations serve a dual purpose: they highlight
the efficacy of our method, and simultaneously, shed light on the intricate mechanisms underpinning
theRegionSpot .
95 Conclusions and limitations
In this study, we introduce RegionSpot , a novel and efficient framework leveraging frozen vision
and vision-language foundation models for region recognition, eliminating the need for training from
scratch. To fully exploit knowledge in pretrained models and minimize the training overhead, we
keep both foundation models frozen and focus optimization efforts solely on a lightweight attention-
based knowledge integration module. Extensive experiments in the context of open-world object
understanding confirms the superior performance of our method, even with a substantially smaller
number of learnable parameters, which distinguishes our method and enables efficient training.
Impressively, RegionSpot outperforms the leading GLIP-L by 2.9 in mAP, and this lead grows
to 13.1 when considering complex rare categories. While our method advances open world region
understanding, it still not unleash potential capabilities from the foundmental models, such as the
automatic localization ability from SAM, which could reduce reliance on external region proposal
mechanisms for object detection and enhance versatility. We leave this for further investigation.
References
[1]Zeynep Akata, Mateusz Malinowski, Mario Fritz, and Bernt Schiele. Multi-cue zero-shot
learning with strong supervision. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition , pages 59–68, 2016.
[2]Nicolas Carion, Francisco Massa, Gabriel Synnaeve, Nicolas Usunier, Alexander Kirillov, and
Sergey Zagoruyko. End-to-end object detection with transformers. In European conference on
computer vision , pages 213–229. Springer, 2020.
[3]Soravit Changpinyo, Wei-Lun Chao, and Fei Sha. Predicting visual exemplars of unseen classes
for zero-shot learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision ,
pages 3476–3485, 2017.
[4]Yu Du, Fangyun Wei, Zihe Zhang, Miaojing Shi, Yue Gao, and Guoqi Li. Learning to prompt for
open-vocabulary object detection with vision-language model. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 14084–14093, 2022.
[5]Ali Farhadi, Ian Endres, Derek Hoiem, and David Forsyth. Describing objects by their attributes.
In2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 1778–1785. IEEE,
2009.
[6]Andrea Frome, Greg S Corrado, Jon Shlens, Samy Bengio, Jeff Dean, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato,
and Tomas Mikolov. Devise: A deep visual-semantic embedding model. Advances in neural
information processing systems , 26, 2013.
[7]Xiuye Gu, Tsung-Yi Lin, Weicheng Kuo, and Yin Cui. Open-vocabulary object detection via
vision and language knowledge distillation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.13921 , 2021.
[8]Agrim Gupta, Piotr Dollar, and Ross Girshick. Lvis: A dataset for large vocabulary instance
segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition , pages 5356–5364, 2019.
[9]Kaiming He, Georgia Gkioxari, Piotr Dollár, and Ross Girshick. Mask r-cnn. In Proceedings of
the IEEE international conference on computer vision , pages 2961–2969, 2017.
[10] Dinesh Jayaraman and Kristen Grauman. Zero-shot recognition with unreliable attributes.
Advances in neural information processing systems , 27, 2014.
[11] Chao Jia, Yinfei Yang, Ye Xia, Yi-Ting Chen, Zarana Parekh, Hieu Pham, Quoc Le, Yun-Hsuan
Sung, Zhen Li, and Tom Duerig. Scaling up visual and vision-language representation learning
with noisy text supervision. In International conference on machine learning , pages 4904–4916.
PMLR, 2021.
[12] Aishwarya Kamath, Mannat Singh, Yann LeCun, Gabriel Synnaeve, Ishan Misra, and Nicolas
Carion. Mdetr-modulated detection for end-to-end multi-modal understanding. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 1780–1790, 2021.
10[13] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.6980 , 2014.
[14] Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson,
Tete Xiao, Spencer Whitehead, Alexander C Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, et al. Segment anything. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2304.02643 , 2023.
[15] Ivan Krasin, Tom Duerig, Neil Alldrin, Vittorio Ferrari, Sami Abu-El-Haija, Alina Kuznetsova,
Hassan Rom, Jasper Uijlings, Stefan Popov, Andreas Veit, et al. Openimages: A public
dataset for large-scale multi-label and multi-class image classification. Dataset available from
https://github. com/openimages , 2(3):18, 2017.
[16] Weicheng Kuo, Yin Cui, Xiuye Gu, AJ Piergiovanni, and Anelia Angelova. F-vlm: Open-
vocabulary object detection upon frozen vision and language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2209.15639 , 2022.
[17] Chunyuan Li, Haotian Liu, Liunian Li, Pengchuan Zhang, Jyoti Aneja, Jianwei Yang, Ping
Jin, Houdong Hu, Zicheng Liu, Yong Jae Lee, et al. Elevater: A benchmark and toolkit for
evaluating language-augmented visual models. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems , 35:9287–9301, 2022.
[18] Liunian Harold Li, Pengchuan Zhang, Haotian Zhang, Jianwei Yang, Chunyuan Li, Yiwu
Zhong, Lijuan Wang, Lu Yuan, Lei Zhang, Jenq-Neng Hwang, et al. Grounded language-image
pre-training. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition , pages 10965–10975, 2022.
[19] Chuang Lin, Peize Sun, Yi Jiang, Ping Luo, Lizhen Qu, Gholamreza Haffari, Zehuan Yuan, and
Jianfei Cai. Learning object-language alignments for open-vocabulary object detection. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2211.14843 , 2022.
[20] Tsung-Yi Lin, Priya Goyal, Ross Girshick, Kaiming He, and Piotr Dollár. Focal loss for dense
object detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision ,
pages 2980–2988, 2017.
[21] Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr
Dollár, and C Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In Computer
Vision–ECCV 2014: 13th European Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-12, 2014,
Proceedings, Part V 13 , pages 740–755. Springer, 2014.
[22] Chuofan Ma, Yi Jiang, Xin Wen, Zehuan Yuan, and Xiaojuan Qi. Codet: Co-occurrence guided
region-word alignment for open-vocabulary object detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.16667 ,
2023.
[23] Zongyang Ma, Guan Luo, Jin Gao, Liang Li, Yuxin Chen, Shaoru Wang, Congxuan Zhang,
and Weiming Hu. Open-vocabulary one-stage detection with hierarchical visual-language
knowledge distillation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition , pages 14074–14083, 2022.
[24] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal,
Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual
models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning ,
pages 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
[25] Scott Reed, Zeynep Akata, Honglak Lee, and Bernt Schiele. Learning deep representations of
fine-grained visual descriptions. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition , pages 49–58, 2016.
[26] Shaoqing Ren, Kaiming He, Ross Girshick, and Jian Sun. Faster r-cnn: Towards real-time
object detection with region proposal networks. Advances in neural information processing
systems , 28, 2015.
[27] Marcus Rohrbach, Michael Stark, and Bernt Schiele. Evaluating knowledge transfer and
zero-shot learning in a large-scale setting. In CVPR 2011 , pages 1641–1648. IEEE, 2011.
11[28] Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Antonio Torralba, and Josh Tenenbaum. Learning to share visual
appearance for multiclass object detection. In CVPR 2011 , pages 1481–1488. IEEE, 2011.
[29] Shuai Shao, Zeming Li, Tianyuan Zhang, Chao Peng, Gang Yu, Xiangyu Zhang, Jing Li, and
Jian Sun. Objects365: A large-scale, high-quality dataset for object detection. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , pages 8430–8439, 2019.
[30] Richard Socher, Milind Ganjoo, Christopher D Manning, and Andrew Ng. Zero-shot learning
through cross-modal transfer. Advances in neural information processing systems , 26, 2013.
[31] Peize Sun, Rufeng Zhang, Yi Jiang, Tao Kong, Chenfeng Xu, Wei Zhan, Masayoshi Tomizuka,
Lei Li, Zehuan Yuan, Changhu Wang, et al. Sparse r-cnn: End-to-end object detection with
learnable proposals. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition , pages 14454–14463, 2021.
[32] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information
processing systems , 30, 2017.
[33] Jiaqi Wang, Pan Zhang, Tao Chu, Yuhang Cao, Yujie Zhou, Tong Wu, Bin Wang, Con-
ghui He, and Dahua Lin. V3det: Vast vocabulary visual detection dataset. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.03752 , 2023.
[34] Xiaolong Wang, Yufei Ye, and Abhinav Gupta. Zero-shot recognition via semantic embeddings
and knowledge graphs. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition , pages 6857–6866, 2018.
[35] Guo-Sen Xie, Li Liu, Fan Zhu, Fang Zhao, Zheng Zhang, Yazhou Yao, Jie Qin, and Ling Shao.
Region graph embedding network for zero-shot learning. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020:
16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part IV 16 , pages
562–580. Springer, 2020.
[36] Bin Yan, Yi Jiang, Jiannan Wu, Dong Wang, Ping Luo, Zehuan Yuan, and Huchuan Lu.
Universal instance perception as object discovery and retrieval. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 15325–15336, 2023.
[37] Lewei Yao, Jianhua Han, Xiaodan Liang, Dan Xu, Wei Zhang, Zhenguo Li, and Hang Xu.
Detclipv2: Scalable open-vocabulary object detection pre-training via word-region alignment.
InProceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,
pages 23497–23506, 2023.
[38] Lewei Yao, Jianhua Han, Youpeng Wen, Xiaodan Liang, Dan Xu, Wei Zhang, Zhenguo Li,
Chunjing Xu, and Hang Xu. Detclip: Dictionary-enriched visual-concept paralleled pre-training
for open-world detection. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:9125–9138,
2022.
[39] Yuhang Zang, Wei Li, Kaiyang Zhou, Chen Huang, and Chen Change Loy. Open-vocabulary
detr with conditional matching. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pages 106–122.
Springer, 2022.
[40] Hao Zhang, Feng Li, Xueyan Zou, Shilong Liu, Chunyuan Li, Jianfeng Gao, Jianwei Yang,
and Lei Zhang. A simple framework for open-vocabulary segmentation and detection. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2303.08131 , 2023.
[41] Haotian Zhang, Pengchuan Zhang, Xiaowei Hu, Yen-Chun Chen, Liunian Li, Xiyang Dai,
Lijuan Wang, Lu Yuan, Jenq-Neng Hwang, and Jianfeng Gao. Glipv2: Unifying localization
and vision-language understanding. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
35:36067–36080, 2022.
[42] Hang Zhao, Xavier Puig, Bolei Zhou, Sanja Fidler, and Antonio Torralba. Open vocabulary
scene parsing. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision , pages
2002–2010, 2017.
12[43] Yiwu Zhong, Jianwei Yang, Pengchuan Zhang, Chunyuan Li, Noel Codella, Liunian Harold Li,
Luowei Zhou, Xiyang Dai, Lu Yuan, Yin Li, et al. Regionclip: Region-based language-image
pretraining. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition , pages 16793–16803, 2022.
[44] Kaiyang Zhou, Jingkang Yang, Chen Change Loy, and Ziwei Liu. Conditional prompt learning
for vision-language models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition , pages 16816–16825, 2022.
[45] Xueyan Zou, Zi-Yi Dou, Jianwei Yang, Zhe Gan, Linjie Li, Chunyuan Li, Xiyang Dai, Harkirat
Behl, Jianfeng Wang, Lu Yuan, et al. Generalized decoding for pixel, image, and language. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages
15116–15127, 2023.
13A Additional Experimental Result
Training efficiency. To illustrate the training efficiency of RegionSpot , we benchmark its GPU
training hours against RegionCLIP and GLIP, as showcased in Table 8. Even though we utilize the
ViT-Large as our backbone, our model achieves faster training. This efficiency can be attributed to
our frozen approach and processing of images at a reduced resolution of 224x224 for the CLIP Large.
All benchmarks were executed in a consistent hardware environment, leveraging eight NVIDIA V100
GPUs. In stark contrast, GLIP necessitates an extensive 92K GPU hours, a whopping 436 times
more than our approach, mainly due to its exhaustive fine-tuning of both Vision and Text models.
Interestingly, even when RegionCLIP adopts a smaller backbone akin to ours, it still requires 4.6K
GPU hours.
Table 8: Comparisons with the training efficiency.
Method Training dataTrain time
(GPU hours)Learnable
Param (M)
RegionCLIP CC3M 4.6K -
GLIP-T O365, GoldG, Cap4M 92.1K -
GLIP-L FourODs,GoldG,Cap24M 120K 289
GDINO-L O365,OI,GoldG,Cap4M,COCO,RefC no released 341
RegionSpot-Pro O365, OI, V3D 0.2K 35
Table 9: Effect of increasing the detection training data.
Data APrAPcAPf AP
Objects365 11.9 13.6 20.2 15.9
Objects365 + OpenImages 16.4 18.2 23.7 20.1
Objects365 + OpenImages + V3DET 24.9 21.6 25.5 23.7
Benefit of increasing the detection training data Table 9 showcases the performance improve-
ments observed when augmenting the training data size. Through our proposed framework, integrating
additional detection data from diverse sources consistently enhances the capabilities rooted in pre-
trained knowledge. Compared to training with only Objects365, including OpenImages effectively
improves the overall AP from 15.9 to 20.1. The inclusion of V3Det further propels the performance,
achieving an impressive overall AP of 23.7. This improvement is particularly significant for rare
categories, with an increase from 16.4 to 24.9 (a gain of +8.5 AP), attributable to its extensive
vocabulary.
B More visualizations on LVIS
Figure 5 provides more examples on LVIS [8].
14GLIP
OURS
GLIP
OURS
GLIP
OURS
Figure 5: More visualizations in comparison with GLIP. Best viewed when zoomed-in.
15NeurIPS Paper Checklist
1.Claims
Question: Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the
paper’s contributions and scope?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: Refer to the Abstract andIntroduction in Sec. and Sec. 1.
Guidelines:
•The answer NA means that the abstract and introduction do not include the claims
made in the paper.
•The abstract and/or introduction should clearly state the claims made, including the
contributions made in the paper and important assumptions and limitations. A No or
NA answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers.
•The claims made should match theoretical and experimental results, and reflect how
much the results can be expected to generalize to other settings.
•It is fine to include aspirational goals as motivation as long as it is clear that these goals
are not attained by the paper.
2.Limitations
Question: Does the paper discuss the limitations of the work performed by the authors?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: Refer to Sec. 5.
Guidelines:
•The answer NA means that the paper has no limitation while the answer No means that
the paper has limitations, but those are not discussed in the paper.
• The authors are encouraged to create a separate "Limitations" section in their paper.
•The paper should point out any strong assumptions and how robust the results are to
violations of these assumptions (e.g., independence assumptions, noiseless settings,
model well-specification, asymptotic approximations only holding locally). The authors
should reflect on how these assumptions might be violated in practice and what the
implications would be.
•The authors should reflect on the scope of the claims made, e.g., if the approach was
only tested on a few datasets or with a few runs. In general, empirical results often
depend on implicit assumptions, which should be articulated.
•The authors should reflect on the factors that influence the performance of the approach.
For example, a facial recognition algorithm may perform poorly when image resolution
is low or images are taken in low lighting. Or a speech-to-text system might not be
used reliably to provide closed captions for online lectures because it fails to handle
technical jargon.
•The authors should discuss the computational efficiency of the proposed algorithms
and how they scale with dataset size.
•If applicable, the authors should discuss possible limitations of their approach to
address problems of privacy and fairness.
•While the authors might fear that complete honesty about limitations might be used by
reviewers as grounds for rejection, a worse outcome might be that reviewers discover
limitations that aren’t acknowledged in the paper. The authors should use their best
judgment and recognize that individual actions in favor of transparency play an impor-
tant role in developing norms that preserve the integrity of the community. Reviewers
will be specifically instructed to not penalize honesty concerning limitations.
3.Theory Assumptions and Proofs
Question: For each theoretical result, does the paper provide the full set of assumptions and
a complete (and correct) proof?
Answer: [NA]
16Justification: No theoretical results in this paper.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not include theoretical results.
•All the theorems, formulas, and proofs in the paper should be numbered and cross-
referenced.
•All assumptions should be clearly stated or referenced in the statement of any theorems.
•The proofs can either appear in the main paper or the supplemental material, but if
they appear in the supplemental material, the authors are encouraged to provide a short
proof sketch to provide intuition.
•Inversely, any informal proof provided in the core of the paper should be complemented
by formal proofs provided in appendix or supplemental material.
• Theorems and Lemmas that the proof relies upon should be properly referenced.
4.Experimental Result Reproducibility
Question: Does the paper fully disclose all the information needed to reproduce the main ex-
perimental results of the paper to the extent that it affects the main claims and/or conclusions
of the paper (regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not)?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: The result is reproducible by training the framework under our instructions.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
•If the paper includes experiments, a No answer to this question will not be perceived
well by the reviewers: Making the paper reproducible is important, regardless of
whether the code and data are provided or not.
•If the contribution is a dataset and/or model, the authors should describe the steps taken
to make their results reproducible or verifiable.
•Depending on the contribution, reproducibility can be accomplished in various ways.
For example, if the contribution is a novel architecture, describing the architecture fully
might suffice, or if the contribution is a specific model and empirical evaluation, it may
be necessary to either make it possible for others to replicate the model with the same
dataset, or provide access to the model. In general. releasing code and data is often
one good way to accomplish this, but reproducibility can also be provided via detailed
instructions for how to replicate the results, access to a hosted model (e.g., in the case
of a large language model), releasing of a model checkpoint, or other means that are
appropriate to the research performed.
•While NeurIPS does not require releasing code, the conference does require all submis-
sions to provide some reasonable avenue for reproducibility, which may depend on the
nature of the contribution. For example
(a)If the contribution is primarily a new algorithm, the paper should make it clear how
to reproduce that algorithm.
(b)If the contribution is primarily a new model architecture, the paper should describe
the architecture clearly and fully.
(c)If the contribution is a new model (e.g., a large language model), then there should
either be a way to access this model for reproducing the results or a way to reproduce
the model (e.g., with an open-source dataset or instructions for how to construct
the dataset).
(d)We recognize that reproducibility may be tricky in some cases, in which case
authors are welcome to describe the particular way they provide for reproducibility.
In the case of closed-source models, it may be that access to the model is limited in
some way (e.g., to registered users), but it should be possible for other researchers
to have some path to reproducing or verifying the results.
5.Open access to data and code
Question: Does the paper provide open access to the data and code, with sufficient instruc-
tions to faithfully reproduce the main experimental results, as described in supplemental
material?
17Answer: [No]
Justification: The code will be available after being accepted.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that paper does not include experiments requiring code.
•Please see the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https://nips.cc/
public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details.
•While we encourage the release of code and data, we understand that this might not be
possible, so “No” is an acceptable answer. Papers cannot be rejected simply for not
including code, unless this is central to the contribution (e.g., for a new open-source
benchmark).
•The instructions should contain the exact command and environment needed to run to
reproduce the results. See the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https:
//nips.cc/public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details.
•The authors should provide instructions on data access and preparation, including how
to access the raw data, preprocessed data, intermediate data, and generated data, etc.
•The authors should provide scripts to reproduce all experimental results for the new
proposed method and baselines. If only a subset of experiments are reproducible, they
should state which ones are omitted from the script and why.
•At submission time, to preserve anonymity, the authors should release anonymized
versions (if applicable).
•Providing as much information as possible in supplemental material (appended to the
paper) is recommended, but including URLs to data and code is permitted.
6.Experimental Setting/Details
Question: Does the paper specify all the training and test details (e.g., data splits, hyper-
parameters, how they were chosen, type of optimizer, etc.) necessary to understand the
results?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: Refer to the Implement Details in Sec. 4.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
•The experimental setting should be presented in the core of the paper to a level of detail
that is necessary to appreciate the results and make sense of them.
•The full details can be provided either with the code, in appendix, or as supplemental
material.
7.Experiment Statistical Significance
Question: Does the paper report error bars suitably and correctly defined or other appropriate
information about the statistical significance of the experiments?
Answer: [No]
Justification: The error bars are not reported because it would be too computationally
expensive.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
•The authors should answer "Yes" if the results are accompanied by error bars, confi-
dence intervals, or statistical significance tests, at least for the experiments that support
the main claims of the paper.
•The factors of variability that the error bars are capturing should be clearly stated (for
example, train/test split, initialization, random drawing of some parameter, or overall
run with given experimental conditions).
•The method for calculating the error bars should be explained (closed form formula,
call to a library function, bootstrap, etc.)
• The assumptions made should be given (e.g., Normally distributed errors).
18•It should be clear whether the error bar is the standard deviation or the standard error
of the mean.
•It is OK to report 1-sigma error bars, but one should state it. The authors should
preferably report a 2-sigma error bar than state that they have a 96% CI, if the hypothesis
of Normality of errors is not verified.
•For asymmetric distributions, the authors should be careful not to show in tables or
figures symmetric error bars that would yield results that are out of range (e.g. negative
error rates).
•If error bars are reported in tables or plots, The authors should explain in the text how
they were calculated and reference the corresponding figures or tables in the text.
8.Experiments Compute Resources
Question: For each experiment, does the paper provide sufficient information on the com-
puter resources (type of compute workers, memory, time of execution) needed to reproduce
the experiments?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: Refer to the Implement Details andInference Strategy in Sec. 4.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
•The paper should indicate the type of compute workers CPU or GPU, internal cluster,
or cloud provider, including relevant memory and storage.
•The paper should provide the amount of compute required for each of the individual
experimental runs as well as estimate the total compute.
•The paper should disclose whether the full research project required more compute
than the experiments reported in the paper (e.g., preliminary or failed experiments that
didn’t make it into the paper).
9.Code Of Ethics
Question: Does the research conducted in the paper conform, in every respect, with the
NeurIPS Code of Ethics https://neurips.cc/public/EthicsGuidelines ?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: The research conforms with the NeurIPS Code of Ethics.
Guidelines:
•The answer NA means that the authors have not reviewed the NeurIPS Code of Ethics.
•If the authors answer No, they should explain the special circumstances that require a
deviation from the Code of Ethics.
•The authors should make sure to preserve anonymity (e.g., if there is a special consid-
eration due to laws or regulations in their jurisdiction).
10.Broader Impacts
Question: Does the paper discuss both potential positive societal impacts and negative
societal impacts of the work performed?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: Refer to the Broader Impacts in Sec. 5.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that there is no societal impact of the work performed.
•If the authors answer NA or No, they should explain why their work has no societal
impact or why the paper does not address societal impact.
•Examples of negative societal impacts include potential malicious or unintended uses
(e.g., disinformation, generating fake profiles, surveillance), fairness considerations
(e.g., deployment of technologies that could make decisions that unfairly impact specific
groups), privacy considerations, and security considerations.
19•The conference expects that many papers will be foundational research and not tied
to particular applications, let alone deployments. However, if there is a direct path to
any negative applications, the authors should point it out. For example, it is legitimate
to point out that an improvement in the quality of generative models could be used to
generate deepfakes for disinformation. On the other hand, it is not needed to point out
that a generic algorithm for optimizing neural networks could enable people to train
models that generate Deepfakes faster.
•The authors should consider possible harms that could arise when the technology is
being used as intended and functioning correctly, harms that could arise when the
technology is being used as intended but gives incorrect results, and harms following
from (intentional or unintentional) misuse of the technology.
•If there are negative societal impacts, the authors could also discuss possible mitigation
strategies (e.g., gated release of models, providing defenses in addition to attacks,
mechanisms for monitoring misuse, mechanisms to monitor how a system learns from
feedback over time, improving the efficiency and accessibility of ML).
11.Safeguards
Question: Does the paper describe safeguards that have been put in place for responsible
release of data or models that have a high risk for misuse (e.g., pretrained language models,
image generators, or scraped datasets)?
Answer: [NA]
Justification: The code and models we use and will be released do not have high risk for
misuse.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper poses no such risks.
•Released models that have a high risk for misuse or dual-use should be released with
necessary safeguards to allow for controlled use of the model, for example by requiring
that users adhere to usage guidelines or restrictions to access the model or implementing
safety filters.
•Datasets that have been scraped from the Internet could pose safety risks. The authors
should describe how they avoided releasing unsafe images.
•We recognize that providing effective safeguards is challenging, and many papers do
not require this, but we encourage authors to take this into account and make a best
faith effort.
12.Licenses for existing assets
Question: Are the creators or original owners of assets (e.g., code, data, models), used in
the paper, properly credited and are the license and terms of use explicitly mentioned and
properly respected?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: The assets are properly credited and the license and terms of use explicitly
mentioned and properly respected in this paper.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not use existing assets.
• The authors should cite the original paper that produced the code package or dataset.
•The authors should state which version of the asset is used and, if possible, include a
URL.
• The name of the license (e.g., CC-BY 4.0) should be included for each asset.
•For scraped data from a particular source (e.g., website), the copyright and terms of
service of that source should be provided.
•If assets are released, the license, copyright information, and terms of use in the
package should be provided. For popular datasets, paperswithcode.com/datasets
has curated licenses for some datasets. Their licensing guide can help determine the
license of a dataset.
20•For existing datasets that are re-packaged, both the original license and the license of
the derived asset (if it has changed) should be provided.
•If this information is not available online, the authors are encouraged to reach out to
the asset’s creators.
13.New Assets
Question: Are new assets introduced in the paper well documented and is the documentation
provided alongside the assets?
Answer: [NA]
Justification: The paper does not release new assets.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not release new assets.
•Researchers should communicate the details of the dataset/code/model as part of their
submissions via structured templates. This includes details about training, license,
limitations, etc.
•The paper should discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose
asset is used.
•At submission time, remember to anonymize your assets (if applicable). You can either
create an anonymized URL or include an anonymized zip file.
14.Crowdsourcing and Research with Human Subjects
Question: For crowdsourcing experiments and research with human subjects, does the paper
include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if applicable, as
well as details about compensation (if any)?
Answer: [NA]
Justification: The paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects.
Guidelines:
•The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with
human subjects.
•Including this information in the supplemental material is fine, but if the main contribu-
tion of the paper involves human subjects, then as much detail as possible should be
included in the main paper.
•According to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics, workers involved in data collection, curation,
or other labor should be paid at least the minimum wage in the country of the data
collector.
15.Institutional Review Board (IRB) Approvals or Equivalent for Research with Human
Subjects
Question: Does the paper describe potential risks incurred by study participants, whether
such risks were disclosed to the subjects, and whether Institutional Review Board (IRB)
approvals (or an equivalent approval/review based on the requirements of your country or
institution) were obtained?
Answer: [NA]
Justification: The paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects.
Guidelines:
•The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with
human subjects.
•Depending on the country in which research is conducted, IRB approval (or equivalent)
may be required for any human subjects research. If you obtained IRB approval, you
should clearly state this in the paper.
•We recognize that the procedures for this may vary significantly between institutions
and locations, and we expect authors to adhere to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics and the
guidelines for their institution.
•For initial submissions, do not include any information that would break anonymity (if
applicable), such as the institution conducting the review.
21