GenWarp: Single Image to Novel Views with
Semantic-Preserving Generative Warping
Junyoung Seo1,3∗Kazumi Fukuda1Takashi Shibuya1Takuya Narihira1Naoki Murata1
Shoukang Hu1Chieh-Hsin Lai1Seungryong Kim3†Yuki Mitsufuji1,2†
1Sony AI2Sony Group Corporation3KAIST
Generated View
Out-of-Domain
In-Domaingostraight, turnle#gostraight,turnrightInput View
Generated View
Figure 1: Teaser. Our model generates plausible novel views, conditioned on only a single input
view , enabling to handle both in-domain images (top) and out-of-domain images (bottom).
Abstract
Generating novel views from a single image remains a challenging task due to
the complexity of 3D scenes and the limited diversity in the existing multi-view
datasets to train a model on. Recent research combining large-scale text-to-image
(T2I) models with monocular depth estimation (MDE) has shown promise in
handling in-the-wild images. In these methods, an input view is geometrically
warped to novel views with estimated depth maps, then the warped image is
inpainted by T2I models. However, they struggle with noisy depth maps and
loss of semantic details when warping an input view to novel viewpoints. In
this paper, we propose a novel approach for single-shot novel view synthesis, a
semantic-preserving generative warping framework that enables T2I generative
models to learn where to warp andwhere to generate , through augmenting cross-
view attention with self-attention. Our approach addresses the limitations of
existing methods by conditioning the generative model on source view images and
incorporating geometric warping signals. Qualitative and quantitative evaluations
demonstrate that our model outperforms existing methods in both in-domain and
out-of-domain scenarios. Project page is available at https://GenWarp-NVS.
github.io .
∗Work done during an internship at Sony AI.†Co-corresponding authors.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).1 Introduction
Text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models ( e.g., Stable Diffusion [ 35]) have made rapid progress in
generating diverse high-quality images when given a user text prompt. This holds extensive potential
utility across various domains, including portrait photo design, cartoon creation, and movie production.
However, current T2I models lack the flexibility of moving cameras in the generated image. For
example, when a user tries to move the camera closer or farther to the generated image, T2I models
often fail to change the viewpoint of the generated image with a proper notion of 3D awareness.
This limits its application in real-world scenarios where we hope to achieve user-tailored designing
purposes by changing the camera viewpoint for generated images.
To freely move camera viewpoints of an image, a line of research focuses on directly learning a
single-shot novel view generation model with a camera viewpoint condition from large-scale 3D
datasets. For example, with the advent of large-scale 3D object datasets such as Objaverse [ 10], recent
attempts [ 26,40,27] achieve success in generating novel views of 3D objects from a single image.
Beyond the object-centric novel views, efforts for full 3D scenes have also been made [ 34,22,36,17,
7]. Unlike the object-centric models, these can generate novel views of complex scenes from a single
image. The performance of single-shot 3D scene novel view generation models highly depends on
the scale of multi-view 3D scene datasets [ 52,8,5]. Compared with the object-centric multi-view
datasets [ 10,9], it is hard to collect such a large-scale dataset for 3D scenes due to its complexity.
Thus, existing models [ 34,22,36,17,7] solely trained on these datasets [ 52,8,5] struggle to handle
in-the-wild images [17, 36].
Instead of learning dataset-specific novel view synthesis models, alternative approaches [ 7,31]
propose utilizing the generative prior from large-scale T2I diffusion models, e.g., Stable Diffusion [ 35].
These works adopt a two-step strategy for novel view generation, called warping-and-inpainting ,
similarly to conventional works [ 48,34,22], with a combination of the large-scale T2I diffusion
models and off-the-shelf monocular depth estimation (MDE) models ( e.g., MiDaS [ 33], ZoeDepth [ 2]).
Specifically, they first predict a depth map of a given image via off-the-shelf MDE models [ 2,33],
and then warp the input image to novel camera viewpoints with the depth-based correspondence,
followed by inpainting occluded regions of the warped images with proper text prompts through the
T2I diffusion models. The warping-and-inpainting approach successfully generates novel views from
in-the-wild images by utilizing large capabilities of T2I diffusion models learned from large-scale
image datasets [39].
Despite such an advantage, this warping-and-inpainting approach can generate novel views only in
a limited range of camera viewpoints around the input image. This is because (1) they struggle to
handle noisy depth maps predicted by the MDE . As shown in Fig. 2(a), a reprojection error from
the estimated depth map makes the warped image unreliable, becoming a significant performance
bottleneck. The subsequent inpainting T2I diffusion models cannot refine the artifacts caused by this
error. In addition, (2) important semantic details of the input view sometimes get lost during
geometric warping , especially when dealing with challenging camera viewpoints. In the above two
cases, only a sparse set of pixels is preserved in the warped image, making it difficult to generate the
occluded regions while preserving the semantic information of the input view. Fig. 2(b) shows a clear
example of this problem; the inpainted regions show a different context with the input view.
To address these issues, we propose a generative warping framework, GenWarp , in which we make
T2I generative models learn where to warp andwhere to generate in images, instead of inpainting
unreliable warped images. Our generative model integrates view warping and occlusion inpainting
into a unified process, unlike existing two-step approaches that perform these operations separately.
By directly taking the input view images with their estimated depth maps, our model learns to
warp them and to generate the occluded or ill-warped parts with our augmented self-attention.
Our approach eliminates the dependency on unreliable warped images and integrates semantic
features from the source view, preserving the semantic details of the source view during generation.
Similar to [ 26,40,49], we leverage generalization capabilities of T2I diffusion models ( e.g., Stable
Diffusion [35]) through fine-tuning a T2I diffusion model.
Our main contributions are as follows:
•We propose a semantic-preserving generative warping framework, GenWarp , to generate
high-quality novel views from a single image.
2(a) ill-warped casecaused by noisy MDE depth
(b) missing original seman1cs of severely occluded regions 
Input ViewWarped ViewInpaintedGenWarp(Ours)
Figure 2: Limitations of explicit warping-and-inpainting approach [ 35,7,31].Results from
challenging new camera viewpoints for warping-and-inpainting approach show artifacts. (a) The
neon sign present in the input view is distorted after geometric warping due to the noisy depth. (b)
The next room peeked in from the new camera viewpoint lacks the context given by the input view.
•GenWarp learns where to warp andwhere to generate in images through augmenting
self-attention with cross-view attention instead of inpainting unreliable warped images,
which eliminates the artifacts caused by error depths and integrates semantic features from
source views, preserving semantic details in generation.
•Extensive experiments on RealEstate10K [ 52], ScanNet [ 8], and in-the-wild images ( e.g.,
AI-generated images) validate that GenWarp achieves superior performances over existing
methods in both in-domain and out-of-domain scenarios.
2 Related Work
Generating novel views from a single image is a challenging ill-posed problem that has primarily
been addressed in combination with generative modeling. These novel view generative models can
generally be categorized into two types: those designed for object-centric scenes and those designed
for general scenes, including indoor and outdoor scenes. On the other hand, following the recent
success of large-scale T2I models, there are methods that can control the generation results, exploiting
the attention mechanism.
Single-shot novel view synthesis for objects. Following the success of image diffusion models [ 15,
35], diffusion models for novel view synthesis [ 47,4] have been proposed. These works train diffusion
models to take a single image and a novel camera viewpoint as conditions, and directly generate novel
view images. More recently, with the emergence of large-scale 3D datasets such as Objaverse [ 10,9],
generalized generative models for single-shot novel view synthesis (NVS) have emerged. Recent
works [ 26,27,19], including Zero123 [ 26], achieves powerful generalization capability by fine-tuning
T2I diffusion models on Objaverse. While these models enable object-centric novel view synthesis
from an in-the-wild single image, such generalized novel view models for general scenes remain
relatively unexplored.
Single-shot novel view synthesis for general scene. Single-shot NVS often necessitates generating
outer regions or occluded regions that are not visible in an input view. Thus, recent works [ 48,34,25,
22] propose generating novel views in a warping-and-refining fashion, which involves first predicting
a depth map of an input view, then warping the input view along with the depth map to a desired
viewpoint, and finally refining missing regions arising from the geometric warping. Another line of
works [ 36,44,17] directly train novel view generative models without depth-based warping. For
3example, GeoGPT [ 36] achieves novel view generation, by feed-forwarding an input view and a
camera viewpoint to a transformer-based architecture. Other recent works [ 44,17] train novel view
diffusion models with a cross-view attentions [ 44,17], or an epipolar constraint [ 44]. More recently,
some works [ 31,7,41] have proposed bringing a large-scale T2I model [ 35] to the warping-and-
refining strategy. This approach enables the generation of novel views from in-the-wild images,
which was previously challenging. Nonetheless, it shows unstable results, especially when the camera
viewpoint is far from its original position. Concurrently, ZeroNVS [ 38] fine-tunes Zero123 [ 26] for
NVS in general scenes. It focuses on camera parametrization to avoid 3D scale ambiguity, which
differs from our focus; we focus on improving depth warping-based NVS.
Attention-based control in large-scale T2I models. Since the emergence of large-scale text-to-
image (T2I) diffusion models [ 35,37], recent works [ 21,40,3,14,16] have investigated the properties
of self-attention within T2I models. For example, Text2Video-Zero [ 21] and MVDream [ 40] generate
consistent images by sharing self-attention between video frames or 3D multi-views, respectively.
Similarly, Animate-Anyone [ 16] and MagicAnimate [ 49] generate human dance videos through a fine-
tuned T2I model that shares self-attention with input image features. Observing the generalization
capability and efficiency of these self-attention-based controllable architectures, our approach is
highly influenced by them. However, using these architectures for single-shot novel view generation
is non-trivial, as input scenes are usually complex, and the details within them must be generated
consistently with the camera movements. Our model integrates MDE depth-based correspondence
while benefiting from the advantages of these architectures, thereby significantly improving single-
shot NVS performance.
3 Method
3.1 Preliminaries and problem statement
Given a single image for an input view Ii, our goal is to generate a novel view Ijfrom a relative
camera viewpoint Pi→jand a camera intrinsic K. To enable this, recent works [ 7,31] propose a
warping-and-inpainting framework that adopts monocular depth estimation (MDE) models [ 2] for
geometric warping and T2I generative models [ 35,37] for inpainting. In this approach, an input view
image Iiis geometrically warped with its MDE depth map Dito the desired camera viewpoint Pi→j:
Iwarp= warp 
Ii;Di, Pi→j, K
, (1)
where warp(·)is a geometric warping function which unprojects pixels of an input view image Ii
with its depth map Dito 3D space, and reprojects them based on the desired camera conditions,
Pi→jandK. More specifically, in homogeneous coordinates, pixel location xiin the input view is
transformed to the pixel location xjin the novel view such that:
xj≃KPi→jDi(xi)K−1xi, (2)
where the projected coordinate xjis a continuous value. To obtain the warped image Iwarp, it is
followed by mapping the pixel colors from the input view to the novel view with a flow field between
xiandxj[48,30,34]. And, inpainting diffusion model ϕgenerates a novel view image by filling the
missing regions in the warped image Iwarp:
Ij∼pϕ(Ij;Iwarp, Mwarp, cj), (3)
where pϕ(·)is a learned distribution of the diffusion model ϕconditioned on an occlusion mask
Mwarp, a text prompt cj, and the warped image Iwarp used for inpainting. This approach assumes
that the estimated depth map Diis accurate. Under the assumption, the warped image Iwarp would
be an ideal guidance for generation.
However, we have observed that the warped image is often not reliable when a novel camera viewpoint
is far from the original viewpoint. It is because this explicit warping operation is sensitive to errors
in the depth map, and depth maps predicted by MDE are usually noisy, arising artifacts after the
warping. The subsequent inpainting model only takes the warped image Iwarp as input which contains
ill-warped artifacts outside the region to be inpainted, thus showing limited performance at large view
changes. Additionally, the warped image may lose the semantic information originally contained in
the input view due to factors such as occlusion, but this approach does not take that into account, as
exemplified in Fig. 2.
4Novel ViewFeatureNovel ViewFeatureInput ViewFeaturesQueryKey
ValueOriginalSelf-APn.MapAggrega@onImplicitDepthCorr.PretrainedT2IDiﬀusionSeman@c Preserver
Warped 2D Coords.
GaussianNoiseCameraPose
Input View
GeneratedNovel ViewCanonical2D Coords.MDE-basedWarping
Figure 3: Method overview: (Left) Given an input view and a desired camera viewpoint, we
obtain a pair of embeddings: a 2D coordinate embedding for the input view, and a warped coordinate
embedding for the novel view from estimated depth through MDE. With these embeddings, a semantic
preserver network produces a semantic feature of the input view, and a diffusion model conditioned on
them learns to conduct geometric warping to generate novel views. ( Right ) We augment self-attention
with cross-view attention, followed by aggregating the features with both attentions at once. It helps
the model to consider where to generate and where to warp.
3.2 Semantic-preserving generative warping
To alleviate the aforementioned limitations, we introduce a novel approach where a diffusion model
learns to implicitly conduct geometric warping operation, instead of warping the pixels or the features
directly. We design the model to interactively compensate for the ill-warped regions during its
generation process, thereby preventing artifacts typically caused by explicit warping. In addition, to
preserve the semantics in the input view, our framework takes the input view image without warping,
and the encoded semantic features of the input view are incorporated into the generation process,
which is different from other approaches that solely take an unreliable warped image from which the
original semantics are difficult to infer.
To this end, we leverage the attention layers inside the pre-trained diffusion U-net [ 35]. Our key
idea is to learn the attention between input view and novel view features, which serves as an
implicit correspondence that mimics explicit depth-based warping within the diffusion model. By
incorporating this into the diffusion process, we aim to seamlessly integrate the effect of depth-based
warping into the generative prior. This implicit correspondence in the form of attention can be
integrated into the existing self-attention layers inside the diffusion U-net. In so doing, the input
view features additionally interact with the novel view features in the generation process, making the
diffusion models naturally find where to generate andwhere to warp , as visualized in Fig. 4.
Two-stream architecture. Our approach comprises a two-stream architecture, a semantic preserver
network and a diffusion model, sharing an identical U-net-based architecture. The semantic preserver
network takes the input view image Iiand produces a semantic feature Fiof the input view. And, the
diffusion model generates a novel view image Ij, by integrating the input view feature Fiinto its
internal novel view feature Fj. To imbue the diffusion model with the MDE depth-based correspon-
dence, we use a pair of canonical coordinates and warped coordinates as additional conditions. Fig. 3
illustrates an overview of our architecture. In the following, we explain each component in detail.
Warped coordinate embedding. To condition on the MDE depth-based correspondence, we use
two coordinate embeddings, a canonical coordinate embedding for the input view, and a warped
coordinate embedding for the novel view. We are motivated to use the warped coordinate embedding
by [29], whose purpose is correspondence-based appearance manipulation. Here, we extend this
concept to the geometric warping for novel view generation.
Specifically, we construct a canonical 2D coordinate map X∈Rh×w×2, where each value is
normalized between −1and1. This 2D coordinate map is transformed by a positional encoding
function γinto Fourier features [ 43]Ci=γ(X). We use this Fourier feature map Cias the coordinate
embedding for the input view Ii. We then geometrically warp this coordinate embedding Ciof the
5Generated Novel ViewInput View
Cross View A:n. "*+,--
SelfA:n."-./0
?
Augmented Self A+n. !Figure 4: Visualization of augmented self-attention map. In augmented self-attention map A,
the original self-attention part Aselfis more attentive to regions requiring generative priors, such as
occluded or ill-warped areas (top) , while the concatenated cross-view attention part Across focuses
on regions that can be reliably warped from the input view (bottom) . By aggregating both attentions
at once, the model naturally determines which regions to generate and which to warp.
input view to the desired novel viewpoint Pi→j:
Cj= warp( Ci;Di, Pi→j, K), (4)
where warp(·)is the same geometric warping function in Eq. 1. The warped coordinate embedding
Cjserves as the coordinate embedding for the novel view Ij. These coordinate embedding Cifor
the input view and Cjfor the novel view are added to the source view feature Fiand the target view
feature Fjthrough convolution layers respectively. This embedding strategy guides the model to
follow the geometric correlation between the input view and the novel view. In an explicit warping
strategy, the process is inherently affected by depth estimation errors in virtue of regarding the warped
image as a reliably given condition. However, by implicitly learning to warp with this embedding, it
is expected that the influence of these errors can be mitigated.
Augmenting self-attention with cross-view attention. To infuse the input view features Fi, we
first construct a cross-view attention, where the cross-view attention map represents the similarities
between the input view and the novel view being generated. Thanks to the coordinate embeddings,
the cross-view attention map learns to give depth-based correspondence that can be absorbed into
the generative process. Then, we propose concatenating this cross-view attention to the existing
self-attention.
Specifically, we concatenate the keys and values of self-attention layers in the diffusion U-net with
the input view features Fi, and apply the self-attention [ 45] with the following query, key, and value:
q=Fj, k = [Fi, Fj], v = [Fi, Fj], (5)
where Fiis the input view feature in the semantic preserver network, and Fjis the novel view
feature in the diffusion U-net. Then we can obtain the augmented self-attention map A, which is a
concatenation of the cross-view attention map Across and the self-attention map Aself.
By aggregating the values with both attentions at once, the model learns to balance the contributions
from the novel view’s self-attention Aselfand the cross-view attention Across. Our intuition behind
this design is that the original self-attention Aselfin the diffusion U-net attends to the generative prior,
and the cross-view attention Across attends to the warping prior from the input view. This allows the
model to inherently decide which regions should rely more on its generative capability and which
areas should depend primarily on the information from the input view warping, as shown in Fig. 4.
3.3 Training strategy
Fine-tuning pretrained text-to-image diffusion models. We leverage the pretrained Stable Dif-
fusion 1.5 model [ 35] for both diffusion U-net and semantic preserver network, to inherit its gener-
alization capability. Different from Stable Diffusion which takes text prompt embedding through
6InputViewGenWarp(Ours)SD-Inpain1ngInputViewGenWarp(Ours)SD-Inpain1ngFigure 5: Qualitative results with images in the wild. We compare our method with Stable Diffusion
Inpainting [ 35] on in-the-wild images. More qualitatvie results can be found in Fig. 10 of Appendix.
Figure 6: Consistent view generation results. Our model can generate consistent multiple views by
taking pre-generated novel views as inputs.
CLIP [ 32], our model takes an image and a desired camera viewpoint as inputs. Therefore, we replace
text condition needed for Stable Diffusion with image embedding of the input image through a CLIP
image encoder. As all the components in our framework can be trained in an end-to-end manner, we
use a sole training loss for fine-tuning, which is the same as the original training loss in LDM [ 35].
Given a dataset Xconsisting of pairs of source view image Ii, target view image Ij, their camera
information Pi→j, and a depth map Di, we first encode the source view Iiand the target view image
Ijto their corresponding latents ziandzjthrough the LDM encoder, respectively. Then the model is
fine-tuned using the following loss function:
Lours(θ, ψ) =EX,t,ϵ
∥ϵ−ϵθ,ψ(zj,t;zi, Di, Pi→j, K)∥2
2
, (6)
where zj,tdenotes a noised latent of zjat diffusion timestep t.ϵθ,ψ(·)is our model including the
diffusion U-net θand the semantic preserver network ψ, which predicts the added noise in the
diffusion process.
Data preparation. We fine-tune the model on multi-view datasets including indoor scene and
outdoor scene, i.e., RealEstate10K [ 52], ScanNet [ 8], ACID [ 25]. Specifically, we sample two
consecutive frames at intervals of 30-120 frames to make pairs of source view and target view
images. For ScanNet [ 8], we use provided ground-truth depth maps and the camera information. For
RealEstate10K [ 52] and ACID [ 25], ground-truth depth maps are not provided. So, we pre-process
the datasets to generate pseudo ground-truth depth maps and their corresponding camera information.
Specifically, we use DUSt3R [ 46] as a pair-depth estimator, followed by PnP-RANSAC [ 13,23] to
find the corresponding camera information aligned with the estimated depth maps. Additionally,
we exclude pairs with low-confident depth maps in our training dataset. Note that our model is less
affected by 3D scale ambiguity [ 6,38] in this procedure, as camera parameters are aligned to the
scales of estimated depth maps.
4 Experiments
4.1 Experimental setup
We train our model on multiple datasets, including indoor RealEstate10K [ 52], ScanNet [ 8], and
outdoor ACID [ 25] datasets. For fair quantitative and qualitative comparison with baseline meth-
ods [ 36,17] trained on RealEstate10K [ 52], we also prepared a version of our model trained on the
same single dataset. Our baseline methods include GeoGPT [ 36], Photometric-NVS [ 17], and the
7InputViewGround-TruthGenWarp(Ours)SD-Inpain1ngSD-Inpain1ng(ﬁnetuned)Photometric-NVSGeoGPTw/depthFigure 7: Qualitative comparisons with baseline methods [ 35,17,36].We present single-shot
novel view generation results with large viewpoint changes on RealEstate10K [ 52] test set. Our
GenWarp generates high-quality novel views consistent with the input views. We also provide
qualitative results on ScanNet [8] in Fig. 9 of Appendix.
warping-and-inpainting method [ 7,31] using the Stable Diffusion Inpainting model [ 35]. To ensure a
fair evaluation, we also provide results of the Stable Diffusion Inpainting model fine-tuned on the
same multi-view dataset [ 52]. For GeoGPT, we compare with the results from the depth conditional
setting, which is most similar to our approach. For the methods that utilize depth information, namely,
our method, GeoGPT, and Stable Diffusion Inpainting, we use the same monocular depth estimation
models [2, 46]. Please refer to Appendix B for additional details.
4.2 Qualitative results
Qualitative results on in-the-wild images. Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 show qualitative results on in-the-wild
images, e.g., cartoonish pictures, real photos, and AI-generated [ 1] images. SD-Inpainting [ 35]-based
warping-and-inpainting approach, used in recent works [ 7,31], shows reasonable results with a good
generalization capability for extrapolation, but ill-warped artifacts exist in some areas. In contrast,
our method consistently generates feasible novel views by refining those artifacts well.
Qualitative comparisons. We present qualitative comparisons with the baseline methods [ 35,17,
36] in Fig. 7. The warping-and-inpainting approaches with the SD-Inpainting model [ 35,7,31]
show good performance for areas where the input view and novel view clearly overlap. However, for
regions where warped pixels are sparse, it generates inconsistent novel views without considering the
semantic information of the input view. Photometric-NVS [ 17] and GeoGPT [ 36] show reasonable
performance when the camera view changes are small. However, their performance degrades when
the view change is large or when the given images of scenes are underrepresented in the training data,
such as outdoor scenes. Our method generates plausible novel views and is robust to variations in the
type of scenes and camera viewpoints, by considering the semantics of the input views.
4.3 Quantitative results
We perform a quantitative comparison of our model and baseline models [ 35,36,37] trained on
RealEstate10K [ 52], on the test set of RealEstate10K (in-domain) and ScanNet [ 8] (out-of-domain)
using FID for generation quality on distribution level and PSNR for reconstruction quality, with
1,000 generated images. We categorize the distance between source and target views into mid
range (30-60 frames) and long range (60-120 frames). Tab. 1 demonstrates that our method shows
superior performance in both out-of-domain setting and in-domain setting. The SD-Inpainting-based
approaches perform well in terms of PSNR thanks to explicit warping, but struggle with ill-warped
artifacts resulting in poor FID. GeoGPT shows good generation quality as evidenced by its FID score
8MethodsOut-of-domain [8] In-domain [52]
Mid range Mid range Long range
FID↓ PSNR↑ FID↓PSNR↑FID↓PSNR↑
GeoGPT [36] w/depth 85.52 11.36 32.70 12.26 33.91 11.69
Photometric-NVS [17] N/A N/A 37.17 12.05 39.93 11.63
SD-Inpainting [35, 7] 52.20 11.68 41.76 14.21 44.13 12.98
SD-Inpainting [35, 7] (fine-tuned)†72.90 9.10 39.17 14.35 43.08 13.10
GenWarp (Ours) 46.03 12.95 31.10 14.55 32.40 13.55
Table 1: Quantitative comparisons. We compare our method with novel view generative models [ 36,
17] and warping-and-inpainting approach consisting of Stable Diffusion Inpainting [ 35,7,31], on
in-domain setting (training dataset [ 52]), and out-of-domain setting (external dataset [ 8]).†We
additionally provide results of Stable Diffusion Inpainting fine-tuned on the multi-view dataset [ 52].
but tends to disregard input view details, leading to poor PSNR. In the out-of-domain setting, the
SD-Inpainting shows reasonable performance, but its performance deteriorates after fine-tuning on
the multi-view dataset [ 52]. For Photometric-NVS [ 17], we exclude its out-of-domain results as its
provided model trained on RealEstate10K [ 52] fails to generate novel views when camera parameters
in ScanNet [8] are given.
4.4 Ablation study
Conditions FID↓
Warped coordinates 32.40
Warped depth map 34.17
Warped image 35.27
Camera embedding [42] 39.10
Table 2: Ablation on embeddings.Embeddings for warping signal. We perform an abla-
tion study on the embeddings used to create the warping
signal by geometric warping with MDE depth maps. We
compare the warped coordinate embedding to other possi-
ble candidates: warped depth and warped image. Addition-
ally, we test the camera embedding as condition. Specif-
ically, we encode the camera viewpoint to a Plücker ray
representation [ 42] and replace the warped coordinate em-
bedding with this camera embedding. As shown in Tab. 2, the warping signal given by the warped
coordinate embedding is the most effective among them.
0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
Difficulty0.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.9Distortion
GenWarp (Ours)
SD-Inpainting
SD-Inpainting (ftn.)
GeoGPT
Photometric-NVS
Figure 8: Comparison on various
viewpoint changes.Camera viewpoint variations. Fig. 8 illustrates the
relationship between the difficulty of camera viewpoint
changes and the degree of distortion in the generated novel
views. We adopt the analysis of view changes proposed
in [36], using the LPIPS [ 51] metric between GT source
and target views as a proxy for viewpoint change difficulty,
and the LPIPS between the generated and GT target views
as a measure of distortion. As shown in Fig. 8, our method
achieves the least distortion compared to the baseline meth-
ods. Inpainting-based methods [ 35] show the second-best
performance when the viewpoint change is not large, but
GeoGPT [ 36] shows better performance in the case of ex-
treme viewpoint changes.
5 Conclusion
We have proposed GenWarp , a framework for generation of novel views from a single image,
preserving semantics contained in the input view by learning to warp images through a generative
process. By augmenting the self-attention in diffusion models with cross-view attention conditioned
on the warping signal, our approach learns to preserve the semantics of the input view while naturally
determining where to warp and where to generate. Extensive experiments demonstrate that GenWarp
generates higher-quality novel views compared to existing methods, especially for challenging
viewpoint changes, while exhibiting generalization capability to out-of-domain images.
9Societal Impacts
This paper presents in the field of AIGC (AI-Generated Content). The proposed model in the paper
generates images of user-provided camera viewpoints based on input images. Therefore, while there
may be potential social impacts as a consequence, there is nothing in particular to be highlighted.
Our model relies on learning from large-scale multi-view datasets, so it may reflect potential societal
biases included in these datasets.
Acknowledgment
This research was supported by Institute of Information & communications Technology Planning
& Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (RS-2019-II190075, RS-2024-
00509279) and the Culture, Sports, and Tourism R&D Program through the Korea Creative Content
Agency grant funded by the Ministry of Culture, Sports and Tourism (RS-2024-00348469, RS-2023-
00266509), and National Research Foundation of Korea (RS-2024-00346597).
References
[1]James Betker, Gabriel Goh, Li Jing, Tim Brooks, Jianfeng Wang, Linjie Li, Long Ouyang, Juntang
Zhuang, Joyce Lee, Yufei Guo, et al. Improving image generation with better captions. Computer Science.
https://cdn. openai. com/papers/dall-e-3. pdf , 2(3):8, 2023.
[2]Shariq Farooq Bhat, Reiner Birkl, Diana Wofk, Peter Wonka, and Matthias Müller. Zoedepth: Zero-shot
transfer by combining relative and metric depth. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.12288 , 2023.
[3]Mingdeng Cao, Xintao Wang, Zhongang Qi, Ying Shan, Xiaohu Qie, and Yinqiang Zheng. Masactrl:
Tuning-free mutual self-attention control for consistent image synthesis and editing. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 22560–22570, 2023.
[4]Eric R Chan, Koki Nagano, Matthew A Chan, Alexander W Bergman, Jeong Joon Park, Axel Levy, Miika
Aittala, Shalini De Mello, Tero Karras, and Gordon Wetzstein. Generative novel view synthesis with
3d-aware diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision ,
pages 4217–4229, 2023.
[5]Angel Chang, Angela Dai, Thomas Funkhouser, Maciej Halber, Matthias Niessner, Manolis Savva, Shuran
Song, Andy Zeng, and Yinda Zhang. Matterport3d: Learning from rgb-d data in indoor environments.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.06158 , 2017.
[6]David Charatan, Sizhe Li, Andrea Tagliasacchi, and Vincent Sitzmann. pixelsplat: 3d gaussian splats from
image pairs for scalable generalizable 3d reconstruction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.12337 , 2023.
[7]Jaeyoung Chung, Suyoung Lee, Hyeongjin Nam, Jaerin Lee, and Kyoung Mu Lee. Luciddreamer:
Domain-free generation of 3d gaussian splatting scenes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.13384 , 2023.
[8]Angela Dai, Angel X Chang, Manolis Savva, Maciej Halber, Thomas Funkhouser, and Matthias Nießner.
Scannet: Richly-annotated 3d reconstructions of indoor scenes. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 5828–5839, 2017.
[9]Matt Deitke, Ruoshi Liu, Matthew Wallingford, Huong Ngo, Oscar Michel, Aditya Kusupati, Alan Fan,
Christian Laforte, Vikram V oleti, Samir Yitzhak Gadre, et al. Objaverse-xl: A universe of 10m+ 3d objects.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36, 2024.
[10] Matt Deitke, Dustin Schwenk, Jordi Salvador, Luca Weihs, Oscar Michel, Eli VanderBilt, Ludwig Schmidt,
Kiana Ehsani, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Ali Farhadi. Objaverse: A universe of annotated 3d objects. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 13142–
13153, 2023.
[11] Congyue Deng, Chiyu Jiang, Charles R Qi, Xinchen Yan, Yin Zhou, Leonidas Guibas, Dragomir Anguelov,
et al. Nerdi: Single-view nerf synthesis with language-guided diffusion as general image priors. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 20637–20647,
2023.
[12] Zhiwen Fan, Wenyan Cong, Kairun Wen, Kevin Wang, Jian Zhang, Xinghao Ding, Danfei Xu, Boris
Ivanovic, Marco Pavone, Georgios Pavlakos, et al. Instantsplat: Unbounded sparse-view pose-free gaussian
splatting in 40 seconds. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.20309 , 2024.
10[13] Martin A Fischler and Robert C Bolles. Random sample consensus: a paradigm for model fitting with
applications to image analysis and automated cartography. Communications of the ACM , 24(6):381–395,
1981.
[14] Amir Hertz, Andrey V oynov, Shlomi Fruchter, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Style aligned image generation via
shared attention. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.02133 , 2023.
[15] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in neural
information processing systems , 33:6840–6851, 2020.
[16] Li Hu, Xin Gao, Peng Zhang, Ke Sun, Bang Zhang, and Liefeng Bo. Animate anyone: Consistent and
controllable image-to-video synthesis for character animation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.17117 , 2023.
[17] J Yu Jason, Fereshteh Forghani, Konstantinos G Derpanis, and Marcus A Brubaker. Long-term photometric
consistent novel view synthesis with diffusion models. In 2023 IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 7071–7081. IEEE, 2023.
[18] Rasmus Jensen, Anders Dahl, George V ogiatzis, Engin Tola, and Henrik Aanæs. Large scale multi-view
stereopsis evaluation. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,
pages 406–413, 2014.
[19] Yash Kant, Ziyi Wu, Michael Vasilkovsky, Guocheng Qian, Jian Ren, Riza Alp Guler, Bernard Ghanem,
Sergey Tulyakov, Igor Gilitschenski, and Aliaksandr Siarohin. Spad: Spatially aware multiview diffusers.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05235 , 2024.
[20] Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimkühler, and George Drettakis. 3d gaussian splatting for
real-time radiance field rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics , 42(4):1–14, 2023.
[21] Levon Khachatryan, Andranik Movsisyan, Vahram Tadevosyan, Roberto Henschel, Zhangyang Wang,
Shant Navasardyan, and Humphrey Shi. Text2video-zero: Text-to-image diffusion models are zero-shot
video generators. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages
15954–15964, 2023.
[22] Jing Yu Koh, Harsh Agrawal, Dhruv Batra, Richard Tucker, Austin Waters, Honglak Lee, Yinfei Yang,
Jason Baldridge, and Peter Anderson. Simple and effective synthesis of indoor 3d scenes. In Proceedings
of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 37, pages 1169–1178, 2023.
[23] Vincent Lepetit, Francesc Moreno-Noguer, and Pascal Fua. Ep n p: An accurate o (n) solution to the p n p
problem. International journal of computer vision , 81:155–166, 2009.
[24] Zhengqi Li, Qianqian Wang, Noah Snavely, and Angjoo Kanazawa. Infinitenature-zero: Learning perpetual
view generation of natural scenes from single images. In European Conference on Computer Vision , pages
515–534. Springer, 2022.
[25] Andrew Liu, Richard Tucker, Varun Jampani, Ameesh Makadia, Noah Snavely, and Angjoo Kanazawa.
Infinite nature: Perpetual view generation of natural scenes from a single image. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 14458–14467, 2021.
[26] Ruoshi Liu, Rundi Wu, Basile Van Hoorick, Pavel Tokmakov, Sergey Zakharov, and Carl V ondrick. Zero-
1-to-3: Zero-shot one image to 3d object. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision , pages 9298–9309, 2023.
[27] Yuan Liu, Cheng Lin, Zijiao Zeng, Xiaoxiao Long, Lingjie Liu, Taku Komura, and Wenping Wang.
Syncdreamer: Generating multiview-consistent images from a single-view image. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.03453 , 2023.
[28] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren
Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. Communications of the ACM ,
65(1):99–106, 2021.
[29] Jiteng Mu, Shalini De Mello, Zhiding Yu, Nuno Vasconcelos, Xiaolong Wang, Jan Kautz, and Sifei Liu.
Coordgan: Self-supervised dense correspondences emerge from gans. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 10011–10020, 2022.
[30] Simon Niklaus and Feng Liu. Softmax splatting for video frame interpolation. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 5437–5446, 2020.
[31] Hao Ouyang, Kathryn Heal, Stephen Lombardi, and Tiancheng Sun. Text2immersion: Generative
immersive scene with 3d gaussians. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.09242 , 2023.
11[32] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish
Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual models from
natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning , pages 8748–8763. PMLR,
2021.
[33] René Ranftl, Katrin Lasinger, David Hafner, Konrad Schindler, and Vladlen Koltun. Towards robust
monocular depth estimation: Mixing datasets for zero-shot cross-dataset transfer. IEEE transactions on
pattern analysis and machine intelligence , 44(3):1623–1637, 2020.
[34] Chris Rockwell, David F Fouhey, and Justin Johnson. Pixelsynth: Generating a 3d-consistent experience
from a single image. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision ,
pages 14104–14113, 2021.
[35] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-resolution
image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition , pages 10684–10695, 2022.
[36] Robin Rombach, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. Geometry-free view synthesis: Transformers and
no 3d priors. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages
14356–14366, 2021.
[37] Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily L Denton, Kamyar
Ghasemipour, Raphael Gontijo Lopes, Burcu Karagol Ayan, Tim Salimans, et al. Photorealistic text-to-
image diffusion models with deep language understanding. Advances in neural information processing
systems , 35:36479–36494, 2022.
[38] Kyle Sargent, Zizhang Li, Tanmay Shah, Charles Herrmann, Hong-Xing Yu, Yunzhi Zhang, Eric Ryan
Chan, Dmitry Lagun, Li Fei-Fei, Deqing Sun, et al. Zeronvs: Zero-shot 360-degree view synthesis from a
single real image. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.17994 , 2023.
[39] Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade Gordon, Ross Wightman, Mehdi Cherti,
Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, et al. Laion-5b: An open large-scale
dataset for training next generation image-text models. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems , 35:25278–25294, 2022.
[40] Yichun Shi, Peng Wang, Jianglong Ye, Mai Long, Kejie Li, and Xiao Yang. Mvdream: Multi-view
diffusion for 3d generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.16512 , 2023.
[41] Jaidev Shriram, Alex Trevithick, Lingjie Liu, and Ravi Ramamoorthi. Realmdreamer: Text-driven 3d
scene generation with inpainting and depth diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.07199 , 2024.
[42] Vincent Sitzmann, Semon Rezchikov, Bill Freeman, Josh Tenenbaum, and Fredo Durand. Light field
networks: Neural scene representations with single-evaluation rendering. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , 34:19313–19325, 2021.
[43] Matthew Tancik, Pratul Srinivasan, Ben Mildenhall, Sara Fridovich-Keil, Nithin Raghavan, Utkarsh
Singhal, Ravi Ramamoorthi, Jonathan Barron, and Ren Ng. Fourier features let networks learn high
frequency functions in low dimensional domains. Advances in neural information processing systems ,
33:7537–7547, 2020.
[44] Hung-Yu Tseng, Qinbo Li, Changil Kim, Suhib Alsisan, Jia-Bin Huang, and Johannes Kopf. Consistent
view synthesis with pose-guided diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 16773–16783, 2023.
[45] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems ,
30, 2017.
[46] Shuzhe Wang, Vincent Leroy, Yohann Cabon, Boris Chidlovskii, and Jerome Revaud. Dust3r: Geometric
3d vision made easy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.14132 , 2023.
[47] Daniel Watson, William Chan, Ricardo Martin-Brualla, Jonathan Ho, Andrea Tagliasacchi, and Mohammad
Norouzi. Novel view synthesis with diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.04628 , 2022.
[48] Olivia Wiles, Georgia Gkioxari, Richard Szeliski, and Justin Johnson. Synsin: End-to-end view synthesis
from a single image. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition , pages 7467–7477, 2020.
12[49] Zhongcong Xu, Jianfeng Zhang, Jun Hao Liew, Hanshu Yan, Jia-Wei Liu, Chenxu Zhang, Jiashi Feng, and
Mike Zheng Shou. Magicanimate: Temporally consistent human image animation using diffusion model.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.16498 , 2023.
[50] Alex Yu, Vickie Ye, Matthew Tancik, and Angjoo Kanazawa. pixelnerf: Neural radiance fields from one or
few images. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,
pages 4578–4587, 2021.
[51] Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable
effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition , pages 586–595, 2018.
[52] Tinghui Zhou, Richard Tucker, John Flynn, Graham Fyffe, and Noah Snavely. Stereo magnification:
Learning view synthesis using multiplane images. arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.09817 , 2018.
13Appendix
A Additional qualitative results
Fig. 9 shows qualitative results on out-of-domain setting, i.e., testing on ScanNet [ 8] with our method and
baseline methods [ 36,35,7] trained on RealEstate10K [ 52]. We also provide additional qualitative results on
in-the-wild images in Fig. 10.
InputViewGenWarp(Ours)SD-Inpain1ngGeoGPTw/depth
Figure 9: Extensive qualitative comparisons in out-of-domain setting. We provide qualitative
results of our model trained on RealEstate10K [52], on the external dataset, ScanNet [8].
14InputViewGenWarp(Ours)SD-Inpain1ngWarpedFigure 10: Extensive qualitative results on in-the-wild images. We present extensive qualitative
results of our method and baseline methods [35, 7] on the in-the-wild images.
B Additional implementation details
We initialize our two networks, semantic preserver and diffusion U-net, with Stable Diffusion v1.5 [ 35], and
fine-tune the networks on 2×H100 80GB with a batch size of 48for 2-3 days, at resolutions of 512×384and
512×512. Specifically, we fine-tune the whole parameters of the semantic preserver network and the diffusion
U-net in an end-to-end manner. All the hyper-parameters used in our training are kept same as the training of
Stable Diffusion 1.52. In inference, it takes around 2 seconds to generate a novel view with a single H100 80GB.
2Stable Diffusion v1.5 Model card: https://huggingface.co/runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5
15Monocular depth estimation. We use two external depth estimation networks for all qualitative and
quantitative results: ZoeDepth [ 2] and DUSt3R [ 46]. DUSt3R is a model that predicts pointmaps given two
images as a pair. We use the z-values of these pointmaps in two ways: as a pair depth estimation during training
and as a monocular depth estimation during inference (by using the same image for both input views). For
quantitative evaluation, we use DUSt3R for depth prediction as the predicted depth maps are passed through
the same normalization in the process of DUSt3R with the pseudo depth pairs in training dataset which are
estimated using the same network. For qualitative comparisons, we use ZoeDepth to predict metric depth maps.
Note that we have used the same estimated depth maps for our method and all the baseline methods [ 36,35,7]
which need depth information.
Reproducing warping-and-inpainting approach with T2I inpainting models. To implement the
warping-and-inpainting strategy using Stable Diffusion Inpainting [ 36], we follow ’Dream’ stage of Lucid-
Dreamer [ 7], which consists of inpainting using the pretrained T2I model [ 36] after depth-based warping via
monocular depth estimation in the official code repository. We observe that directly applying the occlusion
mask from depth-based warping to the Stable Diffusion Inpainting model leads to the generation of collapsed
images. As suggested in the official code of LucidDreamer, increasing the occlusion mask size for occlusions
below a certain threshold effectively prevents this collapse. However, this approach involves a trade-off, as
it may further ignore pixels from the source view. Additionally, when using challenging camera trajectories
(especially when moving the camera forward), artifacts still occur despite this mask filtering. To address this,
we set the minimum occlusion size to 8×8and expand smaller occlusions to this size, considering that a
resolution of latents in LDM [ 35] is8times lower than that of the images. We use inverse warping for the
existing warping-and-inpainting method, which provides natural interpolation and reduces occlusion. In contrast,
our method employs forward warping to facilitate the intervention of the generative prior. Fig. 11 shows the
difference between forward warping and inverse warping, and the obtained occlusion masks which are used in
the subsequent inpainting procedure.
InputViewInverseWarpingForward WarpingOcclusion Mask
Figure 11: Following LucidDreamer [ 7], we apply inverse warping and occlusion mask filtering to
reproduce the existing warping-and-inpainting approach [ 7,31] with Stable Diffusion Inpainting [ 35].
C Additional discussion
Explicit feature warping vs. implicit warping (ours). Another straightforward approach for integrating
depth-based warping into diffusion models is to warp features within the diffusion model’s feature space. We
initially tried this diffusion feature warping. Specifically, the input view feature Fifrom the semantic preserver
network is geometrically warped with the corresponding depth map, and then added to the diffusion U-net’s
intermediate feature Fjthrough zero-initialized convolution layers.
This approach shows reasonable performance on multi-view datasets like ScanNet [ 8], which include ground-
truth sensor depth. However, most multi-view datasets [ 25,52] are derived from videos and lack dense GT
depth. To address this, we use estimated depth maps from DUSt3R [ 46], as described in Sec. 3.3. Although
these pseudo depth pairs are useful, they are not highly accurate. Consequently, we found training a model with
explicit feature warping using these pseudo depth pairs leads to instability, as shown in Fig. 12.
16InputViewGenerated View at 5,000 iter.Generated View at 3,000 iter.Figure 12: Unstable training of an explicit feature warping model using pseudo depth data.
Additional analysis on viewpoint changes. We analyze how the performance changes as the ratio of
pixels invisible from the input view increases due to viewpoint changes. As shown in Fig. 13 and Fig. 14, our
method demonstrates the best performance compared to the other methods even as the invisible ratio increases.
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
Ratio of invisible region0.30.40.50.60.70.8LPIPS (distortion)
GenWarp (Ours)
SD-Inpainting
SD-Inpainting (ftn.)
GeoGPT
Photometric-NVS
Figure 13: Comparison of LPIPS with other
methods regarding ratio of invisible region. We
measure LPIPS between generated views and GT
target views, following GeoGPT [ 36]’s evaulation
protocol.
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
Ratio of invisible region0.10.20.30.40.50.60.7LPIPS (distortion)
GenWarp (Ours)
camera embedding + depth
camera embedding (Plu cker)
Figure 14: Additional ablations on view embed-
ding. We compare our full pipeline with a variant
using camera (Plücker) embeddings and another
variant using the camera embeddings and depth
information.
Comparison on reconstruction-based approaches [11, 50, 28]. We provide comparisons with three
additional recent/classical methods (Nerdi [ 11], PixelNeRF [ 50], vanilla NeRF [ 28]) in Fig. 15. For Nerdi [ 11],
due to lack of available codes, we brought curated qualitative results on DTU dataset from their paper. Our result
shows non-blurry, clear novel view compared to other methods.
Input View
NeRFNerdi
GenWarp(Ours)
PixelNeRF
Figure 15: Comparison with reconstruction-based methods on DTU dataset [ 18].Note that our
model used here is not trained on DTU dataset.
Analysis on cross-view attention. To verify how the cross-view attentions attend to corresponding points,
we have used 1,000pairs of images to determine (1) how well cross-attention attends to corresponding points,
and (2) which is more dominant between self-attention and cross-attention for invisible regions and regions
where depth-based correspondence exists. First, Tab. 3 shows the distance between the flow map obtained
from depth information and the flow map extracted from the cross-attention. Specifically, we extracted the
flow map from the cross-attention layer by argmax operation to see where the model pays the most attention to.
It demonstrates that as training progresses, the model learns depth-based matching and warping through the
17cross-attention mechanism. On the other hand, the model where the proposed embedding is replaced with the
Plücker camera embedding shows relatively worse performance in terms of matching distance.
Secondly, in the Tab. 4, we report which part of the concatenated attention map - the cross-attention part or
the self-attention part - is more activated during generation for visible and invisible regions. As exemplified in
Fig. 4, it shows the cross-view attention part focuses on regions that can be reliably warped from the input view,
while the original self-attention part is more attentive to invisible regions requiring generative priors. Regarding
the cross-attention and self-attention for invisible regions, we empirically found that when generating invisible
regions, the model also refers to surrounding visible areas through cross-attention, for instance, to generate the
invisible left side of a desk, it needs to refer to the visible part of the desk for a plausible novel view.
Models Average distance
Ours - 2,000 steps 1.36
Ours - 6,000 steps 0.97
Ours - 10,000 steps 0.90
Ours - converged 0.85
Camera embed. - converged 0.98
Table 3: Matching distance of models over
training steps.Region Cross-attn. Self-attn.
Visible region 0.756 0.244
Invisible region 0.417 0.583
Table 4: Attention distribution in visi-
ble/invisible regions.
3DGS reconstruction. Our model can be applied to various downstream tasks. For example, given a single
image, our model generates 3-4 novel view images, followed by feeding them into fast 3DGS [ 20] reconstructors
such as InstantSplat [ 12]. Then we can easily obtain a 3DGS scene in a few seconds. Video examples are shown
in the project page.
Figure 16: 3DGS reconstruction results. We show extracted frames in the generated 3DGS videos.
Video examples are shown in the project page.
D Limitations
Given extremely distant camera viewpoints where depth-based correspondence has no influence, i.e., beyond the
unprojected pixels with the depth map, our model struggles with generating novel views. In these cases, instead
of generating a novel view in a single step, the approach of sequentially generating novel views conditioned on
pre-generated novel views, similar to other single-shot NVS methods [ 44,17,25,24], should be taken. As with
other works [ 26,40,49] that fine-tune pretrained diffusion models, the quality of the dataset used for fine-tuning
affects the model’s performance. We believe that more high-quality multi-view datasets will maximize the
potential of our model.
18NeurIPS Paper Checklist
1.Claims
Question: Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the paper’s
contributions and scope?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: The Abstract and Introduction clearly state the motivation and a brief description of the
methods used in our paper, along with our contributions. Additionally, at the end of the introduction,
we provide a summary of our contributions.
Guidelines:
•The answer NA means that the abstract and introduction do not include the claims made in the
paper.
•The abstract and/or introduction should clearly state the claims made, including the contributions
made in the paper and important assumptions and limitations. A No or NA answer to this
question will not be perceived well by the reviewers.
•The claims made should match theoretical and experimental results, and reflect how much the
results can be expected to generalize to other settings.
•It is fine to include aspirational goals as motivation as long as it is clear that these goals are not
attained by the paper.
2.Limitations
Question: Does the paper discuss the limitations of the work performed by the authors?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: The limitations of our method are clearly described in Appendix D.
Guidelines:
•The answer NA means that the paper has no limitation while the answer No means that the paper
has limitations, but those are not discussed in the paper.
• The authors are encouraged to create a separate "Limitations" section in their paper.
•The paper should point out any strong assumptions and how robust the results are to violations of
these assumptions (e.g., independence assumptions, noiseless settings, model well-specification,
asymptotic approximations only holding locally). The authors should reflect on how these
assumptions might be violated in practice and what the implications would be.
•The authors should reflect on the scope of the claims made, e.g., if the approach was only tested
on a few datasets or with a few runs. In general, empirical results often depend on implicit
assumptions, which should be articulated.
•The authors should reflect on the factors that influence the performance of the approach. For
example, a facial recognition algorithm may perform poorly when image resolution is low or
images are taken in low lighting. Or a speech-to-text system might not be used reliably to provide
closed captions for online lectures because it fails to handle technical jargon.
•The authors should discuss the computational efficiency of the proposed algorithms and how
they scale with dataset size.
•If applicable, the authors should discuss possible limitations of their approach to address problems
of privacy and fairness.
•While the authors might fear that complete honesty about limitations might be used by reviewers
as grounds for rejection, a worse outcome might be that reviewers discover limitations that
aren’t acknowledged in the paper. The authors should use their best judgment and recognize
that individual actions in favor of transparency play an important role in developing norms that
preserve the integrity of the community. Reviewers will be specifically instructed to not penalize
honesty concerning limitations.
3.Theory Assumptions and Proofs
Question: For each theoretical result, does the paper provide the full set of assumptions and a complete
(and correct) proof?
Answer: [NA]
Justification: Our paper does not involve theoretical results or their proofs.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not include theoretical results.
• All the theorems, formulas, and proofs in the paper should be numbered and cross-referenced.
19• All assumptions should be clearly stated or referenced in the statement of any theorems.
•The proofs can either appear in the main paper or the supplemental material, but if they appear in
the supplemental material, the authors are encouraged to provide a short proof sketch to provide
intuition.
•Inversely, any informal proof provided in the core of the paper should be complemented by
formal proofs provided in appendix or supplemental material.
• Theorems and Lemmas that the proof relies upon should be properly referenced.
4.Experimental Result Reproducibility
Question: Does the paper fully disclose all the information needed to reproduce the main experimental
results of the paper to the extent that it affects the main claims and/or conclusions of the paper
(regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not)?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: In Sec. 3 and Appendix B, we have included the necessary information for reproducibility,
such as the network architecture used in our method, which pretrained checkpoint is utilized, which
datasets are employed, and what data preprocessing steps are performed.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
•If the paper includes experiments, a No answer to this question will not be perceived well by the
reviewers: Making the paper reproducible is important, regardless of whether the code and data
are provided or not.
•If the contribution is a dataset and/or model, the authors should describe the steps taken to make
their results reproducible or verifiable.
•Depending on the contribution, reproducibility can be accomplished in various ways. For
example, if the contribution is a novel architecture, describing the architecture fully might suffice,
or if the contribution is a specific model and empirical evaluation, it may be necessary to either
make it possible for others to replicate the model with the same dataset, or provide access to
the model. In general. releasing code and data is often one good way to accomplish this, but
reproducibility can also be provided via detailed instructions for how to replicate the results,
access to a hosted model (e.g., in the case of a large language model), releasing of a model
checkpoint, or other means that are appropriate to the research performed.
•While NeurIPS does not require releasing code, the conference does require all submissions
to provide some reasonable avenue for reproducibility, which may depend on the nature of the
contribution. For example
(a)If the contribution is primarily a new algorithm, the paper should make it clear how to
reproduce that algorithm.
(b)If the contribution is primarily a new model architecture, the paper should describe the
architecture clearly and fully.
(c)If the contribution is a new model (e.g., a large language model), then there should either be
a way to access this model for reproducing the results or a way to reproduce the model (e.g.,
with an open-source dataset or instructions for how to construct the dataset).
(d)We recognize that reproducibility may be tricky in some cases, in which case authors are
welcome to describe the particular way they provide for reproducibility. In the case of
closed-source models, it may be that access to the model is limited in some way (e.g.,
to registered users), but it should be possible for other researchers to have some path to
reproducing or verifying the results.
5.Open access to data and code
Question: Does the paper provide open access to the data and code, with sufficient instructions to
faithfully reproduce the main experimental results, as described in supplemental material?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: We publicly provide all model weights and code in the project page. The datasets used
for training are publicly available.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that paper does not include experiments requiring code.
•Please see the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https://nips.cc/public/
guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details.
•While we encourage the release of code and data, we understand that this might not be possible,
so “No” is an acceptable answer. Papers cannot be rejected simply for not including code, unless
this is central to the contribution (e.g., for a new open-source benchmark).
20•The instructions should contain the exact command and environment needed to run to reproduce
the results. See the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https://nips.cc/public/
guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details.
•The authors should provide instructions on data access and preparation, including how to access
the raw data, preprocessed data, intermediate data, and generated data, etc.
•The authors should provide scripts to reproduce all experimental results for the new proposed
method and baselines. If only a subset of experiments are reproducible, they should state which
ones are omitted from the script and why.
•At submission time, to preserve anonymity, the authors should release anonymized versions (if
applicable).
•Providing as much information as possible in supplemental material (appended to the paper) is
recommended, but including URLs to data and code is permitted.
6.Experimental Setting/Details
Question: Does the paper specify all the training and test details (e.g., data splits, hyperparameters,
how they were chosen, type of optimizer, etc.) necessary to understand the results?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: The implementation details and experimental settings for our method and the baseline
methods are described in Sec. 4.1, Sec. 3.3, and Appendix B.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
•The experimental setting should be presented in the core of the paper to a level of detail that is
necessary to appreciate the results and make sense of them.
• The full details can be provided either with the code, in appendix, or as supplemental material.
7.Experiment Statistical Significance
Question: Does the paper report error bars suitably and correctly defined or other appropriate informa-
tion about the statistical significance of the experiments?
Answer: [No]
Justification: This task is closer to sampling (generation) within the learned distribution rather than
prediction. To be consistent with the experimental analyses of existing works [ 36,17], this paper
primarily uses distribution distance metrics such as FID and does not include error bars.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
•The authors should answer "Yes" if the results are accompanied by error bars, confidence
intervals, or statistical significance tests, at least for the experiments that support the main claims
of the paper.
•The factors of variability that the error bars are capturing should be clearly stated (for example,
train/test split, initialization, random drawing of some parameter, or overall run with given
experimental conditions).
•The method for calculating the error bars should be explained (closed form formula, call to a
library function, bootstrap, etc.)
• The assumptions made should be given (e.g., Normally distributed errors).
•It should be clear whether the error bar is the standard deviation or the standard error of the
mean.
•It is OK to report 1-sigma error bars, but one should state it. The authors should preferably report
a 2-sigma error bar than state that they have a 96% CI, if the hypothesis of Normality of errors is
not verified.
•For asymmetric distributions, the authors should be careful not to show in tables or figures
symmetric error bars that would yield results that are out of range (e.g. negative error rates).
•If error bars are reported in tables or plots, The authors should explain in the text how they were
calculated and reference the corresponding figures or tables in the text.
8.Experiments Compute Resources
Question: For each experiment, does the paper provide sufficient information on the computer
resources (type of compute workers, memory, time of execution) needed to reproduce the experiments?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: We report the GPU and VRAM used, batch size, and training time in Appendix B.
Guidelines:
21• The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.
•The paper should indicate the type of compute workers CPU or GPU, internal cluster, or cloud
provider, including relevant memory and storage.
•The paper should provide the amount of compute required for each of the individual experimental
runs as well as estimate the total compute.
•The paper should disclose whether the full research project required more compute than the
experiments reported in the paper (e.g., preliminary or failed experiments that didn’t make it into
the paper).
9.Code Of Ethics
Question: Does the research conducted in the paper conform, in every respect, with the NeurIPS Code
of Ethics https://neurips.cc/public/EthicsGuidelines ?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: We have faithfully followed the specified NeurIPS Code of Ethics throughout all our
experiments.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the authors have not reviewed the NeurIPS Code of Ethics.
•If the authors answer No, they should explain the special circumstances that require a deviation
from the Code of Ethics.
•The authors should make sure to preserve anonymity (e.g., if there is a special consideration due
to laws or regulations in their jurisdiction).
10.Broader Impacts
Question: Does the paper discuss both potential positive societal impacts and negative societal impacts
of the work performed?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: We discuss the societal impacts in Appendix 5.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that there is no societal impact of the work performed.
•If the authors answer NA or No, they should explain why their work has no societal impact or
why the paper does not address societal impact.
•Examples of negative societal impacts include potential malicious or unintended uses (e.g.,
disinformation, generating fake profiles, surveillance), fairness considerations (e.g., deploy-
ment of technologies that could make decisions that unfairly impact specific groups), privacy
considerations, and security considerations.
•The conference expects that many papers will be foundational research and not tied to particular
applications, let alone deployments. However, if there is a direct path to any negative applications,
the authors should point it out. For example, it is legitimate to point out that an improvement in
the quality of generative models could be used to generate deepfakes for disinformation. On the
other hand, it is not needed to point out that a generic algorithm for optimizing neural networks
could enable people to train models that generate Deepfakes faster.
•The authors should consider possible harms that could arise when the technology is being used
as intended and functioning correctly, harms that could arise when the technology is being used
as intended but gives incorrect results, and harms following from (intentional or unintentional)
misuse of the technology.
•If there are negative societal impacts, the authors could also discuss possible mitigation strategies
(e.g., gated release of models, providing defenses in addition to attacks, mechanisms for monitor-
ing misuse, mechanisms to monitor how a system learns from feedback over time, improving the
efficiency and accessibility of ML).
11.Safeguards
Question: Does the paper describe safeguards that have been put in place for responsible release of
data or models that have a high risk for misuse (e.g., pretrained language models, image generators, or
scraped datasets)?
Answer: [NA]
Justification: We believe that our model, which is a generative model trained on publicly available
multi-view datasets, does not have a high risk of misuse.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper poses no such risks.
22•Released models that have a high risk for misuse or dual-use should be released with necessary
safeguards to allow for controlled use of the model, for example by requiring that users adhere to
usage guidelines or restrictions to access the model or implementing safety filters.
•Datasets that have been scraped from the Internet could pose safety risks. The authors should
describe how they avoided releasing unsafe images.
•We recognize that providing effective safeguards is challenging, and many papers do not require
this, but we encourage authors to take this into account and make a best faith effort.
12.Licenses for existing assets
Question: Are the creators or original owners of assets (e.g., code, data, models), used in the paper,
properly credited and are the license and terms of use explicitly mentioned and properly respected?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: We have appropriately cited all the papers corresponding to the datasets we used.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not use existing assets.
• The authors should cite the original paper that produced the code package or dataset.
• The authors should state which version of the asset is used and, if possible, include a URL.
• The name of the license (e.g., CC-BY 4.0) should be included for each asset.
•For scraped data from a particular source (e.g., website), the copyright and terms of service of
that source should be provided.
•If assets are released, the license, copyright information, and terms of use in the package should
be provided. For popular datasets, paperswithcode.com/datasets has curated licenses for
some datasets. Their licensing guide can help determine the license of a dataset.
•For existing datasets that are re-packaged, both the original license and the license of the derived
asset (if it has changed) should be provided.
•If this information is not available online, the authors are encouraged to reach out to the asset’s
creators.
13.New Assets
Question: Are new assets introduced in the paper well documented and is the documentation provided
alongside the assets?
Answer: [NA]
Justification: We do not introduce any new assets in this paper.
Guidelines:
• The answer NA means that the paper does not release new assets.
•Researchers should communicate the details of the dataset/code/model as part of their sub-
missions via structured templates. This includes details about training, license, limitations,
etc.
•The paper should discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose asset is
used.
•At submission time, remember to anonymize your assets (if applicable). You can either create an
anonymized URL or include an anonymized zip file.
14.Crowdsourcing and Research with Human Subjects
Question: For crowdsourcing experiments and research with human subjects, does the paper include
the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if applicable, as well as details about
compensation (if any)?
Answer: [NA]
Justification: Our paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects.
Guidelines:
•The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human
subjects.
•Including this information in the supplemental material is fine, but if the main contribution of the
paper involves human subjects, then as much detail as possible should be included in the main
paper.
•According to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics, workers involved in data collection, curation, or other
labor should be paid at least the minimum wage in the country of the data collector.
15.Institutional Review Board (IRB) Approvals or Equivalent for Research with Human Subjects
23Question: Does the paper describe potential risks incurred by study participants, whether such
risks were disclosed to the subjects, and whether Institutional Review Board (IRB) approvals (or an
equivalent approval/review based on the requirements of your country or institution) were obtained?
Answer: [NA]
Justification: Our paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects.
Guidelines:
•The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human
subjects.
•Depending on the country in which research is conducted, IRB approval (or equivalent) may be
required for any human subjects research. If you obtained IRB approval, you should clearly state
this in the paper.
•We recognize that the procedures for this may vary significantly between institutions and
locations, and we expect authors to adhere to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics and the guidelines for
their institution.
• For initial submissions, do not include any information that would break anonymity (if applica-
ble), such as the institution conducting the review.
24