Under review as submission to TMLR
The inverse problem for kernel means
Anonymous authors
Paper under double-blind review
Abstract
We discuss the inverse problem for the kernel embedding of measures. We identify which
elements of a reproducing kernel Hilbert space which are in the cone generated by some
set of kernel functions as polar dual of the Herglotz-type functions, the functions with
positive imaginary part. Over certain spaces, such as Sobelev spaces, the duality to Herglotz
functions reduces to a classical multivariate moment problem, and, over analytic spaces, we
see more complex analytic type conditions. We give conditions for when Herglotz functions
have representations in terms of kernel functions in terms of reflexive reproducing kernel
Hilbert spaces. We identify the orbits of a dynamical system in terms of the Koopmanism
philosophy: we give a way to decide when there is an orbit contained in some compact
subset of the domain.
1 Introduction
Kernel methods offer powerful techniques for dealing with complex and high-dimensional data by implicitly
mapping the data into a high-dimensional feature space using kernel functions, see, for example, Schölkopf
et al. (1998); Muandet et al. (2017); Sriperumbudur et al. (2011). The kernel embedding of measures, also
known as the kernel mean, allows us to represent probability distributions as functions in some reproducing
kernel Hilbert space. The kernel embedding of measures has proven to be a useful tool for various tasks in
machine learning, such as distribution comparison in Gretton et al. (2012), generative modeling in Li et al.
(2015), and density estimation in Liu et al. (2016), due to its ability to leverage the Euclidean geometry of
reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces.
LetΩbe a set. A reproducing kernel Hilbert space is a Hilbert space Hof functions f: Ω→Csuch
that point evaluation is a bounded linear functional. In reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces, for each ω∈Ω
there is a kernel function kω∈Hsuch that⟨f,kω⟩=f(ω).(Note that the kernel functions thus induce
a natural metrizable topology on Ωwhich we will assume is Hausdorff for ease of discussion.) For more
information on the basic theory of reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces, see Paulsen & Raghupathi (2016);
Berlinet & Thomas-Agnan (2011).
As aforementioned, an apparently somewhat useful technique is various contexts is to consider the the
kernel embedding of measures (orkernel mean in the case of distributions) taking a measure µto an
elementι(µ),defined by the map
ι(µ)(z) =/integraldisplay
kω(z)dµ(ω).
Note that
⟨f,ι(µ)⟩=/integraldisplay
f(ω)dµ(ω).
That is,ι(µ)behaves like integration against µas a linear functional on H.See Muandet et al. (2017);
Sriperumbudur et al. (2011) for a comprehensive review establishing theoretical foundations and exploring
applications. The utility of the kernel embeddings of measures has proven significant recently for its ability
to represent probability distributions in a reproducing kernel Hilbert space, which in principle may be
more desirable to manipulate, calculate with, or compare because of their Euclidean geometry, as seen in
various references such as Alvarez-Melis & Jaakkola (2018); Gretton et al. (2012); Sejdinovic et al. (2014);
1Under review as submission to TMLR
Balasubramanian et al. (2021). Each reproducing kernel Hilbert space thus gives a metric on measures
defined byd(µ1,µ2) =∥ι(µ1)−ι(µ2)∥.(Known as the maximum mean discrepancy .) Such metrics are
also desirable over other metrics on measures such as the Wasserstein metric or other transport-based metrics
due to ease of calculation. Note that on a compact space Ω,and a reproducing kernel Hilbert space such
that the kernel embedding of measures is injective, we see that the Wasserstein distance is equal to zero if
and only if the kernel mean metric is zero– that is, the two distances induce the same metric topology.
Our goal will be to discuss the inverse problem for the kernel embedding of measures– given an element
νof a reproducing kernel Hilbert space, when does there exist a measure µsuch thatν(z) =/integraltext
kω(z)dµ.
We identify the elements of a reproducing kernel Hilbert space that correspond to measures (and other
measure-like elements) supported on a given set A,which provides insight into the data distribution and
could potentially facilitate certain various learning tasks.
We will treat several classes of spaces in detail, some of which are mostly of theoretical interest, such as the
Hardy space or other spaces of analytic function, but may apply to some applied topics such as learning
partial differential equations along the lines of Stepaniants (2023), and others which are more concrete such
as Sobelev spaces. Spaces of analytic functions serve as important examples where the kernel embedding
of measures is not injective, which serve as interesting examples where complete information may not be
recoverable– for example, it is certainly plausible that there are multiple theories describing the same real
objects, but which disagree on objects which do not correspond to anything remotely observable in reality,
however troubling it may be to our innate longing for one to be right. Irregardless, the problem of whether
or not an element of a reproducing kernel Hilbert space remains tractable in terms of duality with the so-
called Herglotz functions. Note that, by Caratheodory’s theorem, that over an Ndimensional reproducing
kernel Hilbert space that any such embedded measure can be expressed as a convex combination of at most
N+ 1kernel functions, which may or may not be supported in the support of the original. We identify
the orbits of a dynamical system using the framework of Koopmanism, enabling us to determine when an
orbit is contained within a specific compact subset of the domain. Our results offer theoretical foundations
and likely practical implications for tasks such as distribution modeling, manifold learning along the lines of
Belkin & Niyogi (2003), and anomaly detection (see the survey Chandola et al. (2009).)
2 The cone of A-measures
LetA⊆ Ω.We define the cone CAofA-measures over Hto be the closed cone generated by {kω|ω∈A}.
Observe that we can view the membership problem in CAas the inverse problem for the kernel embedding
of measures, although in the case where Ais not compact we may not obtain a bona fide measure per se,
but something in their weak closure.
Call a reproducing kernel Hilbert space uniform if there exists a point ω0such thatkω0(z)is positive for
everyz∈Ω.Note that ifAis compact and the reproducing kernel Hilbert space is uniform, then if ν∈CA,
there is a positive measure µsuch that⟨f,ν⟩=/integraltext
f(z)dµ(z).
We note that in a reproducing kernel Hilbert space on a compact set, one can reconstruct the measure by
iteratively taking convex combinations with kernel functions, which are the images of point masses under
the kernel embedding of measures. Namely, if one picks optimal convex combinations with random kernel
functions iteratively, we see that the result converges to the desired kernel mean in countably many steps, .
If our setAis compact, then the space of kernel means is compact, so we indeed get convergence. (Note that
if one picks random kernel functions with different distributions, the constructed measures may be different
if the problem is not uniquely determined.)
Theorem 2.1 (Update inequality) .LetHbe a reproducing kernel Hilbert space on Ω.LetA⊆ Ω.Letµ,ν
beA-measures with total variation 1.Ifµis not equal to ν, there exists α∈Asuch that
∥ν∥2>Re[⟨µ,ν⟩+µ(α)−ν(α)].
Moreover, for
t= min{∥ν∥2+ Re[ν(α)−⟨µ,ν⟩−µ(α)]
∥ν−kα∥2,1},
2Under review as submission to TMLR
we get that∥µ−[(1−t)ν+tkα]∥/∥ν−µ∥is minimized and equal to
/radicaligg
1−/bracketleftbigg
Re⟨ν−µ
∥ν−µ∥,ν−kα
∥ν−kα∥⟩/bracketrightbigg2
whent<1or∥µ−kα∥/∥µ−ν∥whent= 1.
Proof.Note that for any γ∈H
−d
dt∥µ−[(1−t)ν+tγ]∥2|t=0= Re⟨ν−µ,ν−γ⟩.
Thus, ifγwere anA-measure with total variation 1,we see that there must be some αsuch that∥ν∥2+
Re[ν(α)−⟨µ,ν⟩−µ(α)] = Re⟨ν−µ,ν−kα⟩>0ifRe⟨ν−µ,ν−γ⟩>0asγis a limit of convex combinations
of kernel functions. (Note that taking γ=µgives such a positive choice.) Solving for the vertex of the
quadratic∥µ−[(1−t)ν+tkα]∥2gives the desired result.
Note that, for optimal α,
/radicaligg
1−/bracketleftbigg
Re⟨ν−µ
∥ν−µ∥,ν−kα
∥ν−kα∥⟩/bracketrightbigg2
≤/radicaligg
1−∥ν−µ∥2
∥ν−kα∥2
so we expect a quadratically slow convergence, along the lines of the law of large numbers whenever ∥µ−kα∥
is bounded above. (As the recurrence tn+1=tn−αt3
nfort,α< 1goes to 0quadratically slow. That is, the
sequence is O(1√n).) For comparable results on the Wasserstein distance, see Del Barrio et al. (1999).
3 Herglotz duality
Given a coneCin some locally convex topological vector space V,we define the polar dualC∗to the cone of
linear functionals with nonnegative real part on C.Note that ifCis a closed cone, the Hahn-Banach theorem
implies that v∈Cif and only if, for every λ∈C∗,Reλ(v)≥0.
Taking the cone CA,the dual cone is exactly the set of h∈Hsuch that Re⟨h,kω⟩= Reh(ω)≥0for all
ω∈A.In analogy with classical complex analysis and operator theory, we call the polar dual of CA,the
cone ofA-Herglotz functions over HdenotedHA.
We callG⊆HAwhich generatesHAas a closed cone an A-test set.
Viewing the above discussion (or perhaps more accurately annotated derivation) as a proof, we have the
following result.
Theorem 3.1. LetHbe a reproducing kernel Hilbert space on some domain Ω.Letν∈H.The following
are equivalent:
1.νis anA-measure overH,
2. For every h∈HAwe have Re⟨ν,h⟩≥0,
3. GivenG⊆HAanA-test set, we have Re⟨ν,h⟩≥0.
Note also that the solution to the inverse problem for the kernel embedding of measures is often highly
nonunique– for example, for Ha space of analytic functions that the problem for Acompact is equivalent to
to the problem for ∂Aby the maximum modulus principle, as they have the same cone of Herglotz functions.
Uniqueness problems for the kernel embedding of measures have been analyzed extensively, see the survey
Sriperumbudur et al. (2011).
3Under review as submission to TMLR
4 Over various spaces
4.1 The global case over analytic function spaces on the unit disk and the Hardy space in particular
LetHbe a reproducing kernel Hilbert space over the unit disk D⊆Csuch that all bounded analytic
functions defined on a neighborhood of the unit disk are in our space.
The space of Herglotz functions HDis exactly the space of h∈Hsuch that Reh≥0.Of course, Herglotz
himself classifed the cone of all analytic functions with nonnegative real part Herglotz (1911); Lax (2002)-
they are functions of the form:
ia+/integraldisplay
|ω|=11 +ωz
1−ωzdµ(ω)
whereais some real number and µis a finite positive measure on the unit circle. Thus, the cone of relevant
Herglotz functions is generated by the elements of the form1+ωz
1−ωzwhere|ω|<1and±i.which exactly says
such functions are a D-test set.
The reproducing kernel for the Hardy spaceH2(D)is given by the Szegő kernel kω(z) =1
1−ωz.Note that
1+ωz
1−ωz= 2kω(z)−1.Thus, ifν∈CD,we have that 2ν(z)−ν(0)is a Herglotz function such that ±iν(0)has
nonnegative real part. That is, we have the following result.
Theorem 4.1. Letν∈H2(D).The following are equivalent:
1.νis aD-measure overH2(D),
2.
ν(z) =ν(0)
2+/integraldisplay
|ω|=11 +ωz
1−ωzdµ(ω)
whereµis a finite positive measure on the unit circle with total massν(0)
2.
3.νmapsDinto the half plane {z∈C|Rez≥ν(0)
2}.
Note that the theorem assumes ν∈H2(D).
4.2 The global case for entire functions
SupposeHis a space of entire analytic functions on Cn. Liouville’s theorem implies that there are at most
only constant Herglotz functions of the from a+ibwhereais positive and bis real are in our reproducing
kernel Hilbert space. Thus, the cone of Cn-measures overHis a space of codimension one plus a ray or the
whole space.
Theorem 4.2. SupposeHis a space of entire analytic functions on Cn.Then, either the cone of Cn-
measures overHis all ofH(when there are no constant functions) or a space of codimension one plus a
ray.
If we additionally assume His uniform and thus contains a constant function, we merely need to have the
value ofνatω0to be positive.
Examplesofsuchspacesincludethe Taylor-typespaces , whicharisefromtakinganentireanalyticfunction
gwith nonnegative power series coefficients and setting kω(z) =g(⟨z,w⟩).Ifg(0)>0,the space is uniform.
The classical Fock space orSegal-Bargmann space (as defined in Bargmann (1961)) is given by kω(z) =
e⟨z,w⟩.(Note there are other objects called the Fock space in noncommutative operator theory, see Fock
(1932).) Note that the choice of gpolynomial gives rise to finite dimensional examples, although one has a
paucity of important operators, such as multipliers, composition operators and so on, and thus one must use
their truncations.
4Under review as submission to TMLR
4.3 Real domains and real algebraic geometry
LetΩbe a subset of Rn.LetHbe a real reproducing kernel Hilbert space. (For example, we could take
certain Sobelev spaces, or the space of functions on finitely many points, important for discretizing the
problem for applications, among other examples.) In such a case, all the kωmust be real-valued functions.
GivenA⊆ Ω,the cone of real-valued Herglotz functions are exactly the nonnegative functions. Thus, the
cone ofA-measures overHare exactly νsuch that for every nonnegative h∈H,⟨ν,h⟩≥0.
In Putinar (1993), the following Positivstellensatz, or positivity locus theorem, was obtained, which itself is
built of the foundational work of Schmüdgen (1987).
Theorem 4.3 (Putinar’s Positivstellensatz) .Letg1,...,be real polynomials (either a finite or infinite list)
innvariables such that at least one of Gi={z∈Rn|gi(z)≥0}is compact. Let g0= 1.LetA=/intersectiontextGi.For
any polynomial psuch thatp>0onA,
p=N/summationdisplay
k=1q2
kgik
whereqkare some real polynomials and ikare some nonnegative integers and Nis finite.
We see the following immediate corollary.
Corollary 4.4. LetΩbe a subset of Rn.LetHbe a Hilbert space of functions which is closed under complex
conjugation such that the polynomials are contained in Hand dense. Let g1,...,be real polynomials (either
a finite or infinite list) in nvariables such that at least one of Gi={z∈Rn|gi(z)≥0}is compact. Let
g0= 1.LetA=/intersectiontext
i{z∈Rn|gi(z)≥0}⊂Ωwe have that the collection of polynomials of the form q2giand
q2are anA-test set.
Define the gi-localizing matrix to be the infinite matrix Ai= [⟨gixα+β,ν⟩]α,βwhereα,βrun over all
multi-indices. We see that ν∈CAif and only if all the Aiare positive semidefinite. (By which we mean all
of its finite principal minors are positive semidefinite.) Thus, we recover exactly the classical conditions on
moment sequences as in Schmüdgen (1987); Curto & Fialkow (2005).
4.4 Reflexive kernels
Say a real reproducing kernel Hilbert space is reflexive ifHΩ⊆H∗
Ωandkω∈H Ω.Note, for example, this
is the case for the Poisson kernel, kw(z) =1
1−wz+1
1−zw−1 = Re1+wz
1−wz.In such a case, by Theorem 3.1,
we have thatHΩ=CΩ.That is, any Herglotz function on a reflexive space is in the cone generated by the
kernels. Note also in a reflexive space that the kernels are positive functions, and the inner product of two
Herglotz functions is positive. The conincidental duality can also be used to do finite interpolation.
Theorem 4.5. LetHbe reflexive. Then, HΩ=CΩ.
Moreover, note that there exists f∈HΩptwisesuch thatf(xi) =yiif and only if for every sequence of aisuch
that/summationtextaikxi∈H Ω,we have that/summationtextaiyi≥0.(HereHΩptwisedenotes the closure of the Herglotz functions
in the topology of pointwise convergence on C∞.)
Note that, over the disk with the Poisson kernel structure, we obtain exactly the Herglotz representation
formulafromtheaboveequivalence. Notethat, withthatstructure, thePickinterpolationtheoremgivesthat
theaboveinterpolationproblemissolvableifandonlyifthereexist ˜yisuchthatthematrix/bracketleftig
yi+yj+i(˜yi−˜yj)
1−xixj/bracketrightig
i,j
is positive semidefinite. It would be most excellent to give a direct proof of the equivalence.
Note that if the kernel functions are nonnegative, then either there is a a pair of Herglotz functions with
negative inner product or the space is reflexive. For example, the pluriharmonic Drury-Arveson space (kernel
Re1+⟨z,w⟩
1−⟨z,w⟩on the Euclidean ball in Cd) in more than one variable is not reflexive, so there must be a pair of
Herglotz functions with negative inner product. (We leave the process of finding such a pair to the reader.)
In general, the set of harmonic functions on an Ωwith smooth enough boundary are reflexive. Note also
that given a space where the kernel functions are nonnegative, one can add some fictional points to the space
5Under review as submission to TMLR
Ωto make the space reflexive. (Corresponding to a maximal cone such that ⟨ν,µ⟩≥0.The utility of such
a construction is questionable, especially as the resulting space is unlikely to have nice features, such as a
lot of multipliers, but is at least worth mentioning. Such maximal cones are the so-called self-dual cones,
which are classified abstractly for general Hilbert spaces in terms of a direct integral theory as described by
Penney (1976). Note there are a lot of these, even in finite dimensions– such the nonnegative orthant, right
circular cones in R3and so on.)
Finally, we point out that a fundamental problem along these lines is given a bounded Ω⊆Cd,when is
there a reflexive reproducing kernel Hilbert space on Ωcontaining pluriharmonic functions defined on a
neighborhood of Ωas a dense subspace? More generally, one would like to classify all reflexive reproducing
kernel Hilbert space structures on a given Ω.
5 Koopmanism and an application of inverse problem for the kernel embedding of
measures.
LetΩbe some domain. Let F: Ω→Ω.Koopmanism is a popular technique in dynamical systems which
(among other things) seeks to find the orbits of a discrete or continuous time dynamical system by linearizing
theproblemviathetheoryofcompositionoperators, KFh=h◦F,whichareknownas Koopmanoperators
in the dynamical context, especially with respect to the dynamic mode decomposition. See Budišić et al.
(2012); Brunton et al. (2022). Their adjoints are the Perron-Fronbenius operators, which act on kernels by
PFkω=kF(ω).The Koopmanism way of doing things (in the discrete time case) should ask when there
is a measure supported in some set Awhich is invariant under composition, which our context translates
to finding eigenvectors νsuch thatPFν=νandνisA-measure overH.Suchνare calledF-invariant
A-measures overH.We say a compact set AisUrysohn on if there exists an A-Herglotz function h∈HA
such thath|A= 0andhAc>0.
Corollary 5.1. LetΩbe some domain. Let F: Ω→Ωcontinuous. LetHbe a reproducing kernel Hilbert
space on Ω.LetA⊆ Ω.The following are equivalent:
1. There exists an F-invariantA-measure overH
2. There is a νsuch thatPFν=νand⟨ν,h⟩≥0for everyhanA-Herglotz function.
Moreover, ifAis Urysohn then such a νcorresponds to a bona fide measureµsupported onAand thusA
contains an orbit of F.
Proof.It is worth explaining why νcorresponds to a such a proper measure µ.Pick a measure µ0supported
onArepresenting ν.Now takeµk=µk−1◦F.Noteµkmust be supported in Asince it also corresponds to
ν.So the support of the measure µ= limN→∞1
N/summationtextN
k=1µkis an orbit of F.
The case of the disk was extremely tractable as we had existing Herglotz representations on the disk. One
wonders if one could adopt our framework to be compatiable with Agler models (see Agler & McCarthy
(2002)) as adapted to Herglotz functions on the bidisk and study dynamics on the bidisk, with a goal of
generalizing existing work such as Sola & Tully-Doyle; Jury & Tsikalas (2023).
Theorem 5.2 (Operator update inequality) .LetΩbe some domain. Let Hbe a reproducing kernel Hilbert
space on Ω.LetTbe a bounded linear operator on H.LetA⊆ Ω.Letν∈H.Suppose there is µ∈CAsuch
thatTµ=µ.IfTν̸=ν,there exists a point α∈Asuch that the derivative of f(t) =∥(T−1)((1−t)ν+tkα)∥2
is negative and, moreover, f′(t)≤−2∥(T−1)ν∥2.
Proof.Takeν∈Htake a random point α∈Amasskα.Now taking the best linear approximation of
∥(T−1)((1−t)ν+tkα)∥2with respect to tatt= 0gives 2 Re⟨(T−1)kα,(T−1)ν⟩−2∥(T−1)ν∥2.Note there
is always an αsuch that Re⟨(T−1)kα,(T−1)ν⟩≤0,if there exists such a measure µwith (T−1)µ= 0.
6Under review as submission to TMLR
Thus, we see again see about quadratically slow convergence on compact Aif one takes optimal updates by
convexly combining with random kernel functions iteratively. Taking T=PFfor someF: Ω→Ωgives the
update inequality for the Koopman orbit-detection case. Conceptually, one can view this as a shift in view–
instead of iterating to find a steady state, we are picking a point and asking how much mass is missing there,
and add it back. Note also that it also statistically feasible to decide when the orbit of every point in A,as
if one stops seeing the norm of the defect ∥(PF−1)ν∥decrease as in Theorem 5.2, then with more and more
confidence we can conclude it will never decrease.
References
Jim Agler and John Edward McCarthy. Pick interpolation and Hilbert function spaces , volume 44. American
Mathematical Soc., 2002.
David Alvarez-Melis and Tommi Jaakkola. Gromov-Wasserstein Alignment of Word Embedding Spaces. In
Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pp. 1881–1890,
2018.
Krishnakumar Balasubramanian, Tong Li, and Ming Yuan. On the optimality of kernel-embedding based
goodness-of-fit tests. The Journal of Machine Learning Research , 22(1):1–45, 2021.
Valentine Bargmann. On a Hilbert space of analytic functions and an associated integral transform part I.
Communications on pure and applied mathematics , 14(3):187–214, 1961.
MikhailBelkinandParthaNiyogi. Laplacianeigenmapsfordimensionalityreductionanddatarepresentation.
Neural computation , 15(6):1373–1396, 2003.
Alain Berlinet and Christine Thomas-Agnan. Reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces in probability and statistics .
Springer Science & Business Media, 2011.
StevenLBrunton, MarkoBudišić, EurikaKaiser, andJNathanKutz. Modernkoopmantheoryfordynamical
systems. SIAM Review , 64(2), 2022.
Marko Budišić, Ryan Mohr, and Igor Mezić. Applied Koopmanism. Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of
Nonlinear Science , 22(4):047510, 2012.
Varun Chandola, Arindam Banerjee, and Vipin Kumar. Anomaly detection: A survey. ACM computing
surveys (CSUR) , 41(3):1–58, 2009.
R. Curto and L. Fialkow. Truncated K-moment problems in several variables. J. Operator Theory , 54(1):
189–226, 2005.
Eustasio Del Barrio, Evarist Giné, and Carlos Matrán. Central limit theorems for the Wasserstein distance
between the empirical and the true distributions. Annals of Probability , pp. 1009–1071, 1999.
Vladimir Fock. Konfigurationsraum und zweite Quantelung. Zeitschrift für Physik , 75(9-10):622–647, 1932.
Arthur Gretton, Karsten M Borgwardt, Malte J Rasch, Bernhard Schölkopf, and Alexander Smola. A kernel
two-sample test. The Journal of Machine Learning Research , 13(1):723–773, 2012.
G. Herglotz. Über Potenzreihen mit positivem, reellen Teil im Einheitskreis. Ber. Verh. Sachs. Akad. Wiss.
Leipzig, 63:501–511, 1911.
Michael T Jury and Georgios Tsikalas. Denjoy-Wolff points on the bidisk via models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.13171 , 2023.
Peter D Lax. Functional analysis , volume 55. John Wiley & Sons, 2002.
YujiaLi,KevinSwersky,andRichZemel. Generativemomentmatchingnetworks. In International conference
on machine learning , pp. 1718–1727. PMLR, 2015.
7Under review as submission to TMLR
Qiang Liu, Jason Lee, and Michael Jordan. A kernelized Stein discrepancy for goodness-of-fit tests. In
International conference on machine learning , pp. 276–284. PMLR, 2016.
Krikamol Muandet, Kenji Fukumizu, Bharath Sriperumbudur, Bernhard Schölkopf, et al. Kernel mean
embedding of distributions: A review and beyond. Foundations and Trends ®in Machine Learning , 10
(1-2):1–141, 2017.
Vern I Paulsen and Mrinal Raghupathi. An introduction to the theory of reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces ,
volume 152. Cambridge university press, 2016.
Richard C Penney. Self-dual cones in Hilbert space. Journal of Functional Analysis , 21(3):305–315, 1976.
Mihai Putinar. Positive polynomials on compact semi-algebraic sets. Indiana University Mathematics
Journal, 42(3):969–984, 1993.
Konrad Schmüdgen. On a generalization of the classical moment problem. Journal of mathematical analysis
and applications , 125(2):461–470, 1987.
Bernhard Schölkopf, Alexander Smola, and Klaus-Robert Müller. Nonlinear component analysis as a kernel
eigenvalue problem. Neural computation , 10(5):1299–1319, 1998.
Dino Sejdinovic, Heiko Strathmann, Maria Lomeli Garcia, Christophe Andrieu, and Arthur Gretton. Kernel
adaptive Metropolis-Hastings. In International conference on machine learning , pp. 1665–1673. PMLR,
2014.
Alan Sola and Ryan Tully-Doyle. Dynamics of low-degree rational inner skew-products on T2. InAnnales
Polonici Mathematici , pp. 1–25. Instytut Matematyczny Polskiej Akademii Nauk.
Bharath Sriperumbudur, Kenji Fukumizu, and Gert R. G. Lanckriet. Universality, Characteristic kernels
and the RKHS embedding of measures. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 12:2389–2410, 2011.
George Stepaniants. Learning partial differential equations in reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces. Journal of
Machine Learning Research , 24(86):1–72, 2023.
8